Please wait
The text you requested is loading.
This shouldn't take more than a minute, depending on
the speed of your Internet connection.

progress graphic

By heaven, methinks it were an easy leap
To pluck bright honour from the pale-faced moon,
Or dive into the bottom of the deep,
Where fathom-line could never touch the ground,
And pluck up drowned honour by the locks.

      — King Henry IV. Part I, Act I Scene 3


SEARCH TEXTS


Plays  +  Sonnets  +  Poems  +  Concordance  +  Advanced Search  +  About OSS

Love's Labour's Lost
(complete text)

print/save print/save view

Act I

1. The king of Navarre’s park.

2. The same.

Act II

1. The same.

Act III

1. The same.

Act IV

1. The same.

2. The same.

3. The same.

Act V

1. The same.

2. The same.


^ Play menu


---

Act I, Scene 1

The king of Navarre’s park.

     	next scene .
---
[Enter FERDINAND king of Navarre, BIRON, LONGAVILLE] [p]and DUMAIN]

Ferdinand. Let fame, that all hunt after in their lives,
Live register'd upon our brazen tombs
And then grace us in the disgrace of death;5
When, spite of cormorant devouring Time,
The endeavor of this present breath may buy
That honour which shall bate his scythe's keen edge
And make us heirs of all eternity.
Therefore, brave conquerors,—for so you are,10
That war against your own affections
And the huge army of the world's desires,—
Our late edict shall strongly stand in force:
Navarre shall be the wonder of the world;
Our court shall be a little Academe,15
Still and contemplative in living art.
You three, Biron, Dumain, and Longaville,
Have sworn for three years' term to live with me
My fellow-scholars, and to keep those statutes
That are recorded in this schedule here:20
Your oaths are pass'd; and now subscribe your names,
That his own hand may strike his honour down
That violates the smallest branch herein:
If you are arm'd to do as sworn to do,
Subscribe to your deep oaths, and keep it too.25
Longaville. I am resolved; 'tis but a three years' fast:
The mind shall banquet, though the body pine:
Fat paunches have lean pates, and dainty bits
Make rich the ribs, but bankrupt quite the wits.
Dumain. My loving lord, Dumain is mortified:30
The grosser manner of these world's delights
He throws upon the gross world's baser slaves:
To love, to wealth, to pomp, I pine and die;
With all these living in philosophy.
Biron. I can but say their protestation over;35
So much, dear liege, I have already sworn,
That is, to live and study here three years.
But there are other strict observances;
As, not to see a woman in that term,
Which I hope well is not enrolled there;40
And one day in a week to touch no food
And but one meal on every day beside,
The which I hope is not enrolled there;
And then, to sleep but three hours in the night,
And not be seen to wink of all the day—45
When I was wont to think no harm all night
And make a dark night too of half the day—
Which I hope well is not enrolled there:
O, these are barren tasks, too hard to keep,
Not to see ladies, study, fast, not sleep!50
Ferdinand. Your oath is pass'd to pass away from these.
Biron. Let me say no, my liege, an if you please:
I only swore to study with your grace
And stay here in your court for three years' space.
Longaville. You swore to that, Biron, and to the rest.55
Biron. By yea and nay, sir, then I swore in jest.
What is the end of study? let me know.
Ferdinand. Why, that to know, which else we should not know.
Biron. Things hid and barr'd, you mean, from common sense?
Ferdinand. Ay, that is study's godlike recompense.60
Biron. Come on, then; I will swear to study so,
To know the thing I am forbid to know:
As thus,—to study where I well may dine,
When I to feast expressly am forbid;
Or study where to meet some mistress fine,65
When mistresses from common sense are hid;
Or, having sworn too hard a keeping oath,
Study to break it and not break my troth.
If study's gain be thus and this be so,
Study knows that which yet it doth not know:70
Swear me to this, and I will ne'er say no.
Ferdinand. These be the stops that hinder study quite
And train our intellects to vain delight.
Biron. Why, all delights are vain; but that most vain,
Which with pain purchased doth inherit pain:75
As, painfully to pore upon a book
To seek the light of truth; while truth the while
Doth falsely blind the eyesight of his look:
Light seeking light doth light of light beguile:
So, ere you find where light in darkness lies,80
Your light grows dark by losing of your eyes.
Study me how to please the eye indeed
By fixing it upon a fairer eye,
Who dazzling so, that eye shall be his heed
And give him light that it was blinded by.85
Study is like the heaven's glorious sun
That will not be deep-search'd with saucy looks:
Small have continual plodders ever won
Save base authority from others' books
These earthly godfathers of heaven's lights90
That give a name to every fixed star
Have no more profit of their shining nights
Than those that walk and wot not what they are.
Too much to know is to know nought but fame;
And every godfather can give a name.95
Ferdinand. How well he's read, to reason against reading!
Dumain. Proceeded well, to stop all good proceeding!
Longaville. He weeds the corn and still lets grow the weeding.
Biron. The spring is near when green geese are a-breeding.
Dumain. How follows that?100
Biron. Fit in his place and time.
Dumain. In reason nothing.
Biron. Something then in rhyme.
Ferdinand. Biron is like an envious sneaping frost,
That bites the first-born infants of the spring.105
Biron. Well, say I am; why should proud summer boast
Before the birds have any cause to sing?
Why should I joy in any abortive birth?
At Christmas I no more desire a rose
Than wish a snow in May's new-fangled mirth;110
But like of each thing that in season grows.
So you, to study now it is too late,
Climb o'er the house to unlock the little gate.
Ferdinand. Well, sit you out: go home, Biron: adieu.
Biron. No, my good lord; I have sworn to stay with you:115
And though I have for barbarism spoke more
Than for that angel knowledge you can say,
Yet confident I'll keep what I have swore
And bide the penance of each three years' day.
Give me the paper; let me read the same;120
And to the strict'st decrees I'll write my name.
Ferdinand. How well this yielding rescues thee from shame!
Biron. [Reads] 'Item, That no woman shall come within a
mile of my court:' Hath this been proclaimed?
Longaville. Four days ago.125
Biron. Let's see the penalty.
[Reads]
'On pain of losing her tongue.' Who devised this penalty?
Longaville. Marry, that did I.
Biron. Sweet lord, and why?130
Longaville. To fright them hence with that dread penalty.
Biron. A dangerous law against gentility!
[Reads]
'Item, If any man be seen to talk with a woman
within the term of three years, he shall endure such135
public shame as the rest of the court can possibly devise.'
This article, my liege, yourself must break;
For well you know here comes in embassy
The French king's daughter with yourself to speak—
A maid of grace and complete majesty—140
About surrender up of Aquitaine
To her decrepit, sick and bedrid father:
Therefore this article is made in vain,
Or vainly comes the admired princess hither.
Ferdinand. What say you, lords? Why, this was quite forgot.145
Biron. So study evermore is overshot:
While it doth study to have what it would
It doth forget to do the thing it should,
And when it hath the thing it hunteth most,
'Tis won as towns with fire, so won, so lost.150
Ferdinand. We must of force dispense with this decree;
She must lie here on mere necessity.
Biron. Necessity will make us all forsworn
Three thousand times within this three years' space;
For every man with his affects is born,155
Not by might master'd but by special grace:
If I break faith, this word shall speak for me;
I am forsworn on 'mere necessity.'
So to the laws at large I write my name:
[Subscribes]160
And he that breaks them in the least degree
Stands in attainder of eternal shame:
Suggestions are to other as to me;
But I believe, although I seem so loath,
I am the last that will last keep his oath.165
But is there no quick recreation granted?
Ferdinand. Ay, that there is. Our court, you know, is haunted
With a refined traveller of Spain;
A man in all the world's new fashion planted,
That hath a mint of phrases in his brain;170
One whom the music of his own vain tongue
Doth ravish like enchanting harmony;
A man of complements, whom right and wrong
Have chose as umpire of their mutiny:
This child of fancy, that Armado hight,175
For interim to our studies shall relate
In high-born words the worth of many a knight
From tawny Spain lost in the world's debate.
How you delight, my lords, I know not, I;
But, I protest, I love to hear him lie180
And I will use him for my minstrelsy.
Biron. Armado is a most illustrious wight,
A man of fire-new words, fashion's own knight.
Longaville. Costard the swain and he shall be our sport;
And so to study, three years is but short.185
[Enter DULL with a letter, and COSTARD]

Dull. Which is the duke's own person?
Biron. This, fellow: what wouldst?
Dull. I myself reprehend his own person, for I am his
grace's tharborough: but I would see his own person190
in flesh and blood.
Biron. This is he.
Dull. Signior Arme—Arme—commends you. There's villany
abroad: this letter will tell you more.
Costard. Sir, the contempts thereof are as touching me.195
Ferdinand. A letter from the magnificent Armado.
Biron. How low soever the matter, I hope in God for high words.
Longaville. A high hope for a low heaven: God grant us patience!
Biron. To hear? or forbear laughing?
Longaville. To hear meekly, sir, and to laugh moderately; or to200
forbear both.
Biron. Well, sir, be it as the style shall give us cause to
climb in the merriness.
Costard. The matter is to me, sir, as concerning Jaquenetta.
The manner of it is, I was taken with the manner.205
Biron. In what manner?
Costard. In manner and form following, sir; all those three:
I was seen with her in the manor-house, sitting with
her upon the form, and taken following her into the
park; which, put together, is in manner and form210
following. Now, sir, for the manner,—it is the
manner of a man to speak to a woman: for the form,—
in some form.
Biron. For the following, sir?
Costard. As it shall follow in my correction: and God defend215
the right!
Ferdinand. Will you hear this letter with attention?
Biron. As we would hear an oracle.
Costard. Such is the simplicity of man to hearken after the flesh.
Ferdinand. [Reads] 'Great deputy, the welkin's vicegerent and220
sole dominator of Navarre, my soul's earth's god,
and body's fostering patron.'
Costard. Not a word of Costard yet.
Ferdinand. [Reads] 'So it is,'—
Costard. It may be so: but if he say it is so, he is, in225
telling true, but so.
Ferdinand. Peace!
Costard. Be to me and every man that dares not fight!
Ferdinand. No words!
Costard. Of other men's secrets, I beseech you.230
Ferdinand. [Reads] 'So it is, besieged with sable-coloured
melancholy, I did commend the black-oppressing humour
to the most wholesome physic of thy health-giving
air; and, as I am a gentleman, betook myself to
walk. The time when. About the sixth hour; when235
beasts most graze, birds best peck, and men sit down
to that nourishment which is called supper: so much
for the time when. Now for the ground which; which,
I mean, I walked upon: it is y-cleped thy park. Then
for the place where; where, I mean, I did encounter240
that obscene and preposterous event, that draweth
from my snow-white pen the ebon-coloured ink, which
here thou viewest, beholdest, surveyest, or seest;
but to the place where; it standeth north-north-east
and by east from the west corner of thy curious-245
knotted garden: there did I see that low-spirited
swain, that base minnow of thy mirth,'—
Costard. Me?
Ferdinand. [Reads] 'that unlettered small-knowing soul,'—
Costard. Me?250
Ferdinand. [Reads] 'that shallow vassal,'—
Costard. Still me?
Ferdinand. [Reads] 'which, as I remember, hight Costard,'—
Costard. O, me!
Ferdinand. [Reads] 'sorted and consorted, contrary to thy255
established proclaimed edict and continent canon,
which with,—O, with—but with this I passion to say
wherewith,—
Costard. With a wench.
Ferdinand. [Reads] 'with a child of our grandmother Eve, a260
female; or, for thy more sweet understanding, a
woman. Him I, as my ever-esteemed duty pricks me on,
have sent to thee, to receive the meed of
punishment, by thy sweet grace's officer, Anthony
Dull; a man of good repute, carriage, bearing, and265
estimation.'
Dull. 'Me, an't shall please you; I am Anthony Dull.
Ferdinand. [Reads] 'For Jaquenetta,—so is the weaker vessel
called which I apprehended with the aforesaid
swain,—I keep her as a vessel of the law's fury;270
and shall, at the least of thy sweet notice, bring
her to trial. Thine, in all compliments of devoted
and heart-burning heat of duty.
DON ADRIANO DE ARMADO.'
Biron. This is not so well as I looked for, but the best275
that ever I heard.
Ferdinand. Ay, the best for the worst. But, sirrah, what say
you to this?
Costard. Sir, I confess the wench.
Ferdinand. Did you hear the proclamation?280
Costard. I do confess much of the hearing it but little of
the marking of it.
Ferdinand. It was proclaimed a year's imprisonment, to be taken
with a wench.
Costard. I was taken with none, sir: I was taken with a damsel.285
Ferdinand. Well, it was proclaimed 'damsel.'
Costard. This was no damsel, neither, sir; she was a virgin.
Ferdinand. It is so varied, too; for it was proclaimed 'virgin.'
Costard. If it were, I deny her virginity: I was taken with a maid.
Ferdinand. This maid will not serve your turn, sir.290
Costard. This maid will serve my turn, sir.
Ferdinand. Sir, I will pronounce your sentence: you shall fast
a week with bran and water.
Costard. I had rather pray a month with mutton and porridge.
Ferdinand. And Don Armado shall be your keeper.295
My Lord Biron, see him deliver'd o'er:
And go we, lords, to put in practise that
Which each to other hath so strongly sworn.
[Exeunt FERDINAND, LONGAVILLE, and DUMAIN]

Biron. I'll lay my head to any good man's hat,300
These oaths and laws will prove an idle scorn.
Sirrah, come on.
Costard. I suffer for the truth, sir; for true it is, I was
taken with Jaquenetta, and Jaquenetta is a true
girl; and therefore welcome the sour cup of305
prosperity! Affliction may one day smile again; and
till then, sit thee down, sorrow!
[Exeunt]

---
. previous scene
Act I, Scene 2

The same.

     	next scene .
---
[Enter DON ADRIANO DE ARMADO and MOTH]

Don Adriano de Armado. Boy, what sign is it when a man of great spirit310
grows melancholy?
Moth. A great sign, sir, that he will look sad.
Don Adriano de Armado. Why, sadness is one and the self-same thing, dear imp.
Moth. No, no; O Lord, sir, no.
Don Adriano de Armado. How canst thou part sadness and melancholy, my315
tender juvenal?
Moth. By a familiar demonstration of the working, my tough senior.
Don Adriano de Armado. Why tough senior? why tough senior?
Moth. Why tender juvenal? why tender juvenal?
Don Adriano de Armado. I spoke it, tender juvenal, as a congruent epitheton320
appertaining to thy young days, which we may
nominate tender.
Moth. And I, tough senior, as an appertinent title to your
old time, which we may name tough.
Don Adriano de Armado. Pretty and apt.325
Moth. How mean you, sir? I pretty, and my saying apt? or
I apt, and my saying pretty?
Don Adriano de Armado. Thou pretty, because little.
Moth. Little pretty, because little. Wherefore apt?
Don Adriano de Armado. And therefore apt, because quick.330
Moth. Speak you this in my praise, master?
Don Adriano de Armado. In thy condign praise.
Moth. I will praise an eel with the same praise.
Don Adriano de Armado. What, that an eel is ingenious?
Moth. That an eel is quick.335
Don Adriano de Armado. I do say thou art quick in answers: thou heatest my blood.
Moth. I am answered, sir.
Don Adriano de Armado. I love not to be crossed.
Moth. [Aside] He speaks the mere contrary; crosses love not him.
Don Adriano de Armado. I have promised to study three years with the duke.340
Moth. You may do it in an hour, sir.
Don Adriano de Armado. Impossible.
Moth. How many is one thrice told?
Don Adriano de Armado. I am ill at reckoning; it fitteth the spirit of a tapster.
Moth. You are a gentleman and a gamester, sir.345
Don Adriano de Armado. I confess both: they are both the varnish of a
complete man.
Moth. Then, I am sure, you know how much the gross sum of
deuce-ace amounts to.
Don Adriano de Armado. It doth amount to one more than two.350
Moth. Which the base vulgar do call three.
Don Adriano de Armado. True.
Moth. Why, sir, is this such a piece of study? Now here
is three studied, ere ye'll thrice wink: and how
easy it is to put 'years' to the word 'three,' and355
study three years in two words, the dancing horse
will tell you.
Don Adriano de Armado. A most fine figure!
Moth. To prove you a cipher.
Don Adriano de Armado. I will hereupon confess I am in love: and as it is360
base for a soldier to love, so am I in love with a
base wench. If drawing my sword against the humour
of affection would deliver me from the reprobate
thought of it, I would take Desire prisoner, and
ransom him to any French courtier for a new-devised365
courtesy. I think scorn to sigh: methinks I should
outswear Cupid. Comfort, me, boy: what great men
have been in love?
Moth. Hercules, master.
Don Adriano de Armado. Most sweet Hercules! More authority, dear boy, name370
more; and, sweet my child, let them be men of good
repute and carriage.
Moth. Samson, master: he was a man of good carriage, great
carriage, for he carried the town-gates on his back
like a porter: and he was in love.375
Don Adriano de Armado. O well-knit Samson! strong-jointed Samson! I do
excel thee in my rapier as much as thou didst me in
carrying gates. I am in love too. Who was Samson's
love, my dear Moth?
Moth. A woman, master.380
Don Adriano de Armado. Of what complexion?
Moth. Of all the four, or the three, or the two, or one of the four.
Don Adriano de Armado. Tell me precisely of what complexion.
Moth. Of the sea-water green, sir.
Don Adriano de Armado. Is that one of the four complexions?385
Moth. As I have read, sir; and the best of them too.
Don Adriano de Armado. Green indeed is the colour of lovers; but to have a
love of that colour, methinks Samson had small reason
for it. He surely affected her for her wit.
Moth. It was so, sir; for she had a green wit.390
Don Adriano de Armado. My love is most immaculate white and red.
Moth. Most maculate thoughts, master, are masked under
such colours.
Don Adriano de Armado. Define, define, well-educated infant.
Moth. My father's wit and my mother's tongue, assist me!395
Don Adriano de Armado. Sweet invocation of a child; most pretty and
pathetical!
Moth. If she be made of white and red,
Her faults will ne'er be known,
For blushing cheeks by faults are bred400
And fears by pale white shown:
Then if she fear, or be to blame,
By this you shall not know,
For still her cheeks possess the same
Which native she doth owe.405
A dangerous rhyme, master, against the reason of
white and red.
Don Adriano de Armado. Is there not a ballad, boy, of the King and the Beggar?
Moth. The world was very guilty of such a ballad some
three ages since: but I think now 'tis not to be410
found; or, if it were, it would neither serve for
the writing nor the tune.
Don Adriano de Armado. I will have that subject newly writ o'er, that I may
example my digression by some mighty precedent.
Boy, I do love that country girl that I took in the415
park with the rational hind Costard: she deserves well.
Moth. [Aside] To be whipped; and yet a better love than
my master.
Don Adriano de Armado. Sing, boy; my spirit grows heavy in love.
Moth. And that's great marvel, loving a light wench.420
Don Adriano de Armado. I say, sing.
Moth. Forbear till this company be past.
[Enter DULL, COSTARD, and JAQUENETTA]

Dull. Sir, the duke's pleasure is, that you keep Costard
safe: and you must suffer him to take no delight425
nor no penance; but a' must fast three days a week.
For this damsel, I must keep her at the park: she
is allowed for the day-woman. Fare you well.
Don Adriano de Armado. I do betray myself with blushing. Maid!
Jaquenetta. Man?430
Don Adriano de Armado. I will visit thee at the lodge.
Jaquenetta. That's hereby.
Don Adriano de Armado. I know where it is situate.
Jaquenetta. Lord, how wise you are!
Don Adriano de Armado. I will tell thee wonders.435
Jaquenetta. With that face?
Don Adriano de Armado. I love thee.
Jaquenetta. So I heard you say.
Don Adriano de Armado. And so, farewell.
Jaquenetta. Fair weather after you!440
Dull. Come, Jaquenetta, away!
[Exeunt DULL and JAQUENETTA]

Don Adriano de Armado. Villain, thou shalt fast for thy offences ere thou
be pardoned.
Costard. Well, sir, I hope, when I do it, I shall do it on a445
full stomach.
Don Adriano de Armado. Thou shalt be heavily punished.
Costard. I am more bound to you than your fellows, for they
are but lightly rewarded.
Don Adriano de Armado. Take away this villain; shut him up.450
Moth. Come, you transgressing slave; away!
Costard. Let me not be pent up, sir: I will fast, being loose.
Moth. No, sir; that were fast and loose: thou shalt to prison.
Costard. Well, if ever I do see the merry days of desolation
that I have seen, some shall see.455
Moth. What shall some see?
Costard. Nay, nothing, Master Moth, but what they look upon.
It is not for prisoners to be too silent in their
words; and therefore I will say nothing: I thank
God I have as little patience as another man; and460
therefore I can be quiet.
[Exeunt MOTH and COSTARD]

Don Adriano de Armado. I do affect the very ground, which is base, where
her shoe, which is baser, guided by her foot, which
is basest, doth tread. I shall be forsworn, which465
is a great argument of falsehood, if I love. And
how can that be true love which is falsely
attempted? Love is a familiar; Love is a devil:
there is no evil angel but Love. Yet was Samson so
tempted, and he had an excellent strength; yet was470
Solomon so seduced, and he had a very good wit.
Cupid's butt-shaft is too hard for Hercules' club;
and therefore too much odds for a Spaniard's rapier.
The first and second cause will not serve my turn;
the passado he respects not, the duello he regards475
not: his disgrace is to be called boy; but his
glory is to subdue men. Adieu, valour! rust rapier!
be still, drum! for your manager is in love; yea,
he loveth. Assist me, some extemporal god of rhyme,
for I am sure I shall turn sonnet. Devise, wit;480
write, pen; for I am for whole volumes in folio.
[Exit]

---
. previous scene
Act II, Scene 1

The same.

     	next scene .
---
[Enter the PRINCESS of France, ROSALINE, MARIA,] [p]KATHARINE, BOYET, Lords, and other Attendants]

Boyet. Now, madam, summon up your dearest spirits:485
Consider who the king your father sends,
To whom he sends, and what's his embassy:
Yourself, held precious in the world's esteem,
To parley with the sole inheritor
Of all perfections that a man may owe,490
Matchless Navarre; the plea of no less weight
Than Aquitaine, a dowry for a queen.
Be now as prodigal of all dear grace
As Nature was in making graces dear
When she did starve the general world beside495
And prodigally gave them all to you.
Princess of France. Good Lord Boyet, my beauty, though but mean,
Needs not the painted flourish of your praise:
Beauty is bought by judgement of the eye,
Not utter'd by base sale of chapmen's tongues:500
I am less proud to hear you tell my worth
Than you much willing to be counted wise
In spending your wit in the praise of mine.
But now to task the tasker: good Boyet,
You are not ignorant, all-telling fame505
Doth noise abroad, Navarre hath made a vow,
Till painful study shall outwear three years,
No woman may approach his silent court:
Therefore to's seemeth it a needful course,
Before we enter his forbidden gates,510
To know his pleasure; and in that behalf,
Bold of your worthiness, we single you
As our best-moving fair solicitor.
Tell him, the daughter of the King of France,
On serious business, craving quick dispatch,515
Importunes personal conference with his grace:
Haste, signify so much; while we attend,
Like humble-visaged suitors, his high will.
Boyet. Proud of employment, willingly I go.
Princess of France. All pride is willing pride, and yours is so.520
[Exit BOYET]
Who are the votaries, my loving lords,
That are vow-fellows with this virtuous duke?
First Lord. Lord Longaville is one.
Princess of France. Know you the man?525
Maria. I know him, madam: at a marriage-feast,
Between Lord Perigort and the beauteous heir
Of Jaques Falconbridge, solemnized
In Normandy, saw I this Longaville:
A man of sovereign parts he is esteem'd;530
Well fitted in arts, glorious in arms:
Nothing becomes him ill that he would well.
The only soil of his fair virtue's gloss,
If virtue's gloss will stain with any soil,
Is a sharp wit matched with too blunt a will;535
Whose edge hath power to cut, whose will still wills
It should none spare that come within his power.
Princess of France. Some merry mocking lord, belike; is't so?
Maria. They say so most that most his humours know.
Princess of France. Such short-lived wits do wither as they grow.540
Who are the rest?
Katharine. The young Dumain, a well-accomplished youth,
Of all that virtue love for virtue loved:
Most power to do most harm, least knowing ill;
For he hath wit to make an ill shape good,545
And shape to win grace though he had no wit.
I saw him at the Duke Alencon's once;
And much too little of that good I saw
Is my report to his great worthiness.
Rosaline. Another of these students at that time550
Was there with him, if I have heard a truth.
Biron they call him; but a merrier man,
Within the limit of becoming mirth,
I never spent an hour's talk withal:
His eye begets occasion for his wit;555
For every object that the one doth catch
The other turns to a mirth-moving jest,
Which his fair tongue, conceit's expositor,
Delivers in such apt and gracious words
That aged ears play truant at his tales560
And younger hearings are quite ravished;
So sweet and voluble is his discourse.
Princess of France. God bless my ladies! are they all in love,
That every one her own hath garnished
With such bedecking ornaments of praise?565
First Lord. Here comes Boyet.
[Re-enter BOYET]

Princess of France. Now, what admittance, lord?
Boyet. Navarre had notice of your fair approach;
And he and his competitors in oath570
Were all address'd to meet you, gentle lady,
Before I came. Marry, thus much I have learnt:
He rather means to lodge you in the field,
Like one that comes here to besiege his court,
Than seek a dispensation for his oath,575
To let you enter his unpeopled house.
Here comes Navarre.
[Enter FERDINAND, LONGAVILLE, DUMAIN, BIRON, and]
Attendants]
Ferdinand. Fair princess, welcome to the court of Navarre.580
Princess of France. 'Fair' I give you back again; and 'welcome' I have
not yet: the roof of this court is too high to be
yours; and welcome to the wide fields too base to be mine.
Ferdinand. You shall be welcome, madam, to my court.
Princess of France. I will be welcome, then: conduct me thither.585
Ferdinand. Hear me, dear lady; I have sworn an oath.
Princess of France. Our Lady help my lord! he'll be forsworn.
Ferdinand. Not for the world, fair madam, by my will.
Princess of France. Why, will shall break it; will and nothing else.
Ferdinand. Your ladyship is ignorant what it is.590
Princess of France. Were my lord so, his ignorance were wise,
Where now his knowledge must prove ignorance.
I hear your grace hath sworn out house-keeping:
Tis deadly sin to keep that oath, my lord,
And sin to break it.595
But pardon me. I am too sudden-bold:
To teach a teacher ill beseemeth me.
Vouchsafe to read the purpose of my coming,
And suddenly resolve me in my suit.
Ferdinand. Madam, I will, if suddenly I may.600
Princess of France. You will the sooner, that I were away;
For you'll prove perjured if you make me stay.
Biron. Did not I dance with you in Brabant once?
Rosaline. Did not I dance with you in Brabant once?
Biron. I know you did.605
Rosaline. How needless was it then to ask the question!
Biron. You must not be so quick.
Rosaline. 'Tis 'long of you that spur me with such questions.
Biron. Your wit's too hot, it speeds too fast, 'twill tire.
Rosaline. Not till it leave the rider in the mire.610
Biron. What time o' day?
Rosaline. The hour that fools should ask.
Biron. Now fair befall your mask!
Rosaline. Fair fall the face it covers!
Biron. And send you many lovers!615
Rosaline. Amen, so you be none.
Biron. Nay, then will I be gone.
Ferdinand. Madam, your father here doth intimate
The payment of a hundred thousand crowns;
Being but the one half of an entire sum620
Disbursed by my father in his wars.
But say that he or we, as neither have,
Received that sum, yet there remains unpaid
A hundred thousand more; in surety of the which,
One part of Aquitaine is bound to us,625
Although not valued to the money's worth.
If then the king your father will restore
But that one half which is unsatisfied,
We will give up our right in Aquitaine,
And hold fair friendship with his majesty.630
But that, it seems, he little purposeth,
For here he doth demand to have repaid
A hundred thousand crowns; and not demands,
On payment of a hundred thousand crowns,
To have his title live in Aquitaine;635
Which we much rather had depart withal
And have the money by our father lent
Than Aquitaine so gelded as it is.
Dear Princess, were not his requests so far
From reason's yielding, your fair self should make640
A yielding 'gainst some reason in my breast
And go well satisfied to France again.
Princess of France. You do the king my father too much wrong
And wrong the reputation of your name,
In so unseeming to confess receipt645
Of that which hath so faithfully been paid.
Ferdinand. I do protest I never heard of it;
And if you prove it, I'll repay it back
Or yield up Aquitaine.
Princess of France. We arrest your word.650
Boyet, you can produce acquittances
For such a sum from special officers
Of Charles his father.
Ferdinand. Satisfy me so.
Boyet. So please your grace, the packet is not come655
Where that and other specialties are bound:
To-morrow you shall have a sight of them.
Ferdinand. It shall suffice me: at which interview
All liberal reason I will yield unto.
Meantime receive such welcome at my hand660
As honour without breach of honour may
Make tender of to thy true worthiness:
You may not come, fair princess, in my gates;
But here without you shall be so received
As you shall deem yourself lodged in my heart,665
Though so denied fair harbour in my house.
Your own good thoughts excuse me, and farewell:
To-morrow shall we visit you again.
Princess of France. Sweet health and fair desires consort your grace!
Ferdinand. Thy own wish wish I thee in every place!670
[Exit]

Biron. Lady, I will commend you to mine own heart.
Rosaline. Pray you, do my commendations; I would be glad to see it.
Biron. I would you heard it groan.
Rosaline. Is the fool sick?675
Biron. Sick at the heart.
Rosaline. Alack, let it blood.
Biron. Would that do it good?
Rosaline. My physic says 'ay.'
Biron. Will you prick't with your eye?680
Rosaline. No point, with my knife.
Biron. Now, God save thy life!
Rosaline. And yours from long living!
Biron. I cannot stay thanksgiving.
[Retiring]

Dumain. Sir, I pray you, a word: what lady is that same?
Boyet. The heir of Alencon, Katharine her name.
Dumain. A gallant lady. Monsieur, fare you well.
[Exit]

Longaville. I beseech you a word: what is she in the white?690
Boyet. A woman sometimes, an you saw her in the light.
Longaville. Perchance light in the light. I desire her name.
Boyet. She hath but one for herself; to desire that were a shame.
Longaville. Pray you, sir, whose daughter?
Boyet. Her mother's, I have heard.695
Longaville. God's blessing on your beard!
Boyet. Good sir, be not offended.
She is an heir of Falconbridge.
Longaville. Nay, my choler is ended.
She is a most sweet lady.700
Boyet. Not unlike, sir, that may be.
[Exit LONGAVILLE]

Biron. What's her name in the cap?
Boyet. Rosaline, by good hap.
Biron. Is she wedded or no?705
Boyet. To her will, sir, or so.
Biron. You are welcome, sir: adieu.
Boyet. Farewell to me, sir, and welcome to you.
[Exit BIRON]

Maria. That last is Biron, the merry madcap lord:710
Not a word with him but a jest.
Boyet. And every jest but a word.
Princess of France. It was well done of you to take him at his word.
Boyet. I was as willing to grapple as he was to board.
Maria. Two hot sheeps, marry.715
Boyet. And wherefore not ships?
No sheep, sweet lamb, unless we feed on your lips.
Maria. You sheep, and I pasture: shall that finish the jest?
Boyet. So you grant pasture for me.
[Offering to kiss her]

Maria. Not so, gentle beast:
My lips are no common, though several they be.
Boyet. Belonging to whom?
Maria. To my fortunes and me.
Princess of France. Good wits will be jangling; but, gentles, agree:725
This civil war of wits were much better used
On Navarre and his book-men; for here 'tis abused.
Boyet. If my observation, which very seldom lies,
By the heart's still rhetoric disclosed with eyes,
Deceive me not now, Navarre is infected.730
Princess of France. With what?
Boyet. With that which we lovers entitle affected.
Princess of France. Your reason?
Boyet. Why, all his behaviors did make their retire
To the court of his eye, peeping thorough desire:735
His heart, like an agate, with your print impress'd,
Proud with his form, in his eye pride express'd:
His tongue, all impatient to speak and not see,
Did stumble with haste in his eyesight to be;
All senses to that sense did make their repair,740
To feel only looking on fairest of fair:
Methought all his senses were lock'd in his eye,
As jewels in crystal for some prince to buy;
Who, tendering their own worth from where they were glass'd,
Did point you to buy them, along as you pass'd:745
His face's own margent did quote such amazes
That all eyes saw his eyes enchanted with gazes.
I'll give you Aquitaine and all that is his,
An you give him for my sake but one loving kiss.
Princess of France. Come to our pavilion: Boyet is disposed.750
Boyet. But to speak that in words which his eye hath
disclosed.
I only have made a mouth of his eye,
By adding a tongue which I know will not lie.
Rosaline. Thou art an old love-monger and speakest skilfully.755
Maria. He is Cupid's grandfather and learns news of him.
Rosaline. Then was Venus like her mother, for her father is but grim.
Boyet. Do you hear, my mad wenches?
Maria. No.
Boyet. What then, do you see?760
Rosaline. Ay, our way to be gone.
Boyet. You are too hard for me.
[Exeunt]

---
. previous scene
Act III, Scene 1

The same.

     	next scene .
---
[Enter DON ADRIANO DE ARMADO and MOTH]

Don Adriano de Armado. Warble, child; make passionate my sense of hearing.765
Moth. Concolinel.
[Singing]

Don Adriano de Armado. Sweet air! Go, tenderness of years; take this key,
give enlargement to the swain, bring him festinately
hither: I must employ him in a letter to my love.770
Moth. Master, will you win your love with a French brawl?
Don Adriano de Armado. How meanest thou? brawling in French?
Moth. No, my complete master: but to jig off a tune at
the tongue's end, canary to it with your feet, humour
it with turning up your eyelids, sigh a note and775
sing a note, sometime through the throat, as if you
swallowed love with singing love, sometime through
the nose, as if you snuffed up love by smelling
love; with your hat penthouse-like o'er the shop of
your eyes; with your arms crossed on your thin-belly780
doublet like a rabbit on a spit; or your hands in
your pocket like a man after the old painting; and
keep not too long in one tune, but a snip and away.
These are complements, these are humours; these
betray nice wenches, that would be betrayed without785
these; and make them men of note—do you note
me?—that most are affected to these.
Don Adriano de Armado. How hast thou purchased this experience?
Moth. By my penny of observation.
Don Adriano de Armado. But O,—but O,—790
Moth. 'The hobby-horse is forgot.'
Don Adriano de Armado. Callest thou my love 'hobby-horse'?
Moth. No, master; the hobby-horse is but a colt, and your
love perhaps a hackney. But have you forgot your love?
Don Adriano de Armado. Almost I had.795
Moth. Negligent student! learn her by heart.
Don Adriano de Armado. By heart and in heart, boy.
Moth. And out of heart, master: all those three I will prove.
Don Adriano de Armado. What wilt thou prove?
Moth. A man, if I live; and this, by, in, and without, upon800
the instant: by heart you love her, because your
heart cannot come by her; in heart you love her,
because your heart is in love with her; and out of
heart you love her, being out of heart that you
cannot enjoy her.805
Don Adriano de Armado. I am all these three.
Moth. And three times as much more, and yet nothing at
all.
Don Adriano de Armado. Fetch hither the swain: he must carry me a letter.
Moth. A message well sympathized; a horse to be ambassador810
for an ass.
Don Adriano de Armado. Ha, ha! what sayest thou?
Moth. Marry, sir, you must send the ass upon the horse,
for he is very slow-gaited. But I go.
Don Adriano de Armado. The way is but short: away!815
Moth. As swift as lead, sir.
Don Adriano de Armado. The meaning, pretty ingenious?
Is not lead a metal heavy, dull, and slow?
Moth. Minime, honest master; or rather, master, no.
Don Adriano de Armado. I say lead is slow.820
Moth. You are too swift, sir, to say so:
Is that lead slow which is fired from a gun?
Don Adriano de Armado. Sweet smoke of rhetoric!
He reputes me a cannon; and the bullet, that's he:
I shoot thee at the swain.825
Moth. Thump then and I flee.
[Exit]

Don Adriano de Armado. A most acute juvenal; voluble and free of grace!
By thy favour, sweet welkin, I must sigh in thy face:
Most rude melancholy, valour gives thee place.830
My herald is return'd.
[Re-enter MOTH with COSTARD]

Moth. A wonder, master! here's a costard broken in a shin.
Don Adriano de Armado. Some enigma, some riddle: come, thy l'envoy; begin.
Costard. No enigma, no riddle, no l'envoy; no salve in the835
mail, sir: O, sir, plantain, a plain plantain! no
l'envoy, no l'envoy; no salve, sir, but a plantain!
Don Adriano de Armado. By virtue, thou enforcest laughter; thy silly
thought my spleen; the heaving of my lungs provokes
me to ridiculous smiling. O, pardon me, my stars!840
Doth the inconsiderate take salve for l'envoy, and
the word l'envoy for a salve?
Moth. Do the wise think them other? is not l'envoy a salve?
Don Adriano de Armado. No, page: it is an epilogue or discourse, to make plain
Some obscure precedence that hath tofore been sain.845
I will example it:
The fox, the ape, and the humble-bee,
Were still at odds, being but three.
There's the moral. Now the l'envoy.
Moth. I will add the l'envoy. Say the moral again.850
Don Adriano de Armado. The fox, the ape, and the humble-bee,
Were still at odds, being but three.
Moth. Until the goose came out of door,
And stay'd the odds by adding four.
Now will I begin your moral, and do you follow with855
my l'envoy.
The fox, the ape, and the humble-bee,
Were still at odds, being but three.
Don Adriano de Armado. Until the goose came out of door,
Staying the odds by adding four.860
Moth. A good l'envoy, ending in the goose: would you
desire more?
Costard. The boy hath sold him a bargain, a goose, that's flat.
Sir, your pennyworth is good, an your goose be fat.
To sell a bargain well is as cunning as fast and loose:865
Let me see; a fat l'envoy; ay, that's a fat goose.
Don Adriano de Armado. Come hither, come hither. How did this argument begin?
Moth. By saying that a costard was broken in a shin.
Then call'd you for the l'envoy.
Costard. True, and I for a plantain: thus came your870
argument in;
Then the boy's fat l'envoy, the goose that you bought;
And he ended the market.
Don Adriano de Armado. But tell me; how was there a costard broken in a shin?
Moth. I will tell you sensibly.875
Costard. Thou hast no feeling of it, Moth: I will speak that l'envoy:
I Costard, running out, that was safely within,
Fell over the threshold and broke my shin.
Don Adriano de Armado. We will talk no more of this matter.
Costard. Till there be more matter in the shin.880
Don Adriano de Armado. Sirrah Costard, I will enfranchise thee.
Costard. O, marry me to one Frances: I smell some l'envoy,
some goose, in this.
Don Adriano de Armado. By my sweet soul, I mean setting thee at liberty,
enfreedoming thy person; thou wert immured,885
restrained, captivated, bound.
Costard. True, true; and now you will be my purgation and let me loose.
Don Adriano de Armado. I give thee thy liberty, set thee from durance; and,
in lieu thereof, impose on thee nothing but this:
bear this significant890
[Giving a letter]
to the country maid Jaquenetta:
there is remuneration; for the best ward of mine
honour is rewarding my dependents. Moth, follow.
[Exit]

Moth. Like the sequel, I. Signior Costard, adieu.
Costard. My sweet ounce of man's flesh! my incony Jew!
[Exit MOTH]
Now will I look to his remuneration. Remuneration!
O, that's the Latin word for three farthings: three900
farthings—remuneration.—'What's the price of this
inkle?'—'One penny.'—'No, I'll give you a
remuneration:' why, it carries it. Remuneration!
why, it is a fairer name than French crown. I will
never buy and sell out of this word.905
[Enter BIRON]

Biron. O, my good knave Costard! exceedingly well met.
Costard. Pray you, sir, how much carnation ribbon may a man
buy for a remuneration?
Biron. What is a remuneration?910
Costard. Marry, sir, halfpenny farthing.
Biron. Why, then, three-farthing worth of silk.
Costard. I thank your worship: God be wi' you!
Biron. Stay, slave; I must employ thee:
As thou wilt win my favour, good my knave,915
Do one thing for me that I shall entreat.
Costard. When would you have it done, sir?
Biron. This afternoon.
Costard. Well, I will do it, sir: fare you well.
Biron. Thou knowest not what it is.920
Costard. I shall know, sir, when I have done it.
Biron. Why, villain, thou must know first.
Costard. I will come to your worship to-morrow morning.
Biron. It must be done this afternoon.
Hark, slave, it is but this:925
The princess comes to hunt here in the park,
And in her train there is a gentle lady;
When tongues speak sweetly, then they name her name,
And Rosaline they call her: ask for her;
And to her white hand see thou do commend930
This seal'd-up counsel. There's thy guerdon; go.
[Giving him a shilling]

Costard. Gardon, O sweet gardon! better than remuneration,
a'leven-pence farthing better: most sweet gardon! I
will do it sir, in print. Gardon! Remuneration!935
[Exit]

Biron. And I, forsooth, in love! I, that have been love's whip;
A very beadle to a humorous sigh;
A critic, nay, a night-watch constable;
A domineering pedant o'er the boy;940
Than whom no mortal so magnificent!
This whimpled, whining, purblind, wayward boy;
This senior-junior, giant-dwarf, Dan Cupid;
Regent of love-rhymes, lord of folded arms,
The anointed sovereign of sighs and groans,945
Liege of all loiterers and malcontents,
Dread prince of plackets, king of codpieces,
Sole imperator and great general
Of trotting 'paritors:—O my little heart:—
And I to be a corporal of his field,950
And wear his colours like a tumbler's hoop!
What, I! I love! I sue! I seek a wife!
A woman, that is like a German clock,
Still a-repairing, ever out of frame,
And never going aright, being a watch,955
But being watch'd that it may still go right!
Nay, to be perjured, which is worst of all;
And, among three, to love the worst of all;
A wightly wanton with a velvet brow,
With two pitch-balls stuck in her face for eyes;960
Ay, and by heaven, one that will do the deed
Though Argus were her eunuch and her guard:
And I to sigh for her! to watch for her!
To pray for her! Go to; it is a plague
That Cupid will impose for my neglect965
Of his almighty dreadful little might.
Well, I will love, write, sigh, pray, sue and groan:
Some men must love my lady and some Joan.
[Exit]

---
. previous scene
Act IV, Scene 1

The same.

     	next scene .
---
[Enter the PRINCESS, and her train, a Forester,] [p]BOYET, ROSALINE, MARIA, and KATHARINE]

Princess of France. Was that the king, that spurred his horse so hard
Against the steep uprising of the hill?
Boyet. I know not; but I think it was not he.
Princess of France. Whoe'er a' was, a' show'd a mounting mind.975
Well, lords, to-day we shall have our dispatch:
On Saturday we will return to France.
Then, forester, my friend, where is the bush
That we must stand and play the murderer in?
Forester. Hereby, upon the edge of yonder coppice;980
A stand where you may make the fairest shoot.
Princess of France. I thank my beauty, I am fair that shoot,
And thereupon thou speak'st the fairest shoot.
Forester. Pardon me, madam, for I meant not so.
Princess of France. What, what? first praise me and again say no?985
O short-lived pride! Not fair? alack for woe!
Forester. Yes, madam, fair.
Princess of France. Nay, never paint me now:
Where fair is not, praise cannot mend the brow.
Here, good my glass, take this for telling true:990
Fair payment for foul words is more than due.
Forester. Nothing but fair is that which you inherit.
Princess of France. See see, my beauty will be saved by merit!
O heresy in fair, fit for these days!
A giving hand, though foul, shall have fair praise.995
But come, the bow: now mercy goes to kill,
And shooting well is then accounted ill.
Thus will I save my credit in the shoot:
Not wounding, pity would not let me do't;
If wounding, then it was to show my skill,1000
That more for praise than purpose meant to kill.
And out of question so it is sometimes,
Glory grows guilty of detested crimes,
When, for fame's sake, for praise, an outward part,
We bend to that the working of the heart;1005
As I for praise alone now seek to spill
The poor deer's blood, that my heart means no ill.
Boyet. Do not curst wives hold that self-sovereignty
Only for praise sake, when they strive to be
Lords o'er their lords?1010
Princess of France. Only for praise: and praise we may afford
To any lady that subdues a lord.
Boyet. Here comes a member of the commonwealth.
[Enter COSTARD]

Costard. God dig-you-den all! Pray you, which is the head lady?1015
Princess of France. Thou shalt know her, fellow, by the rest that have no heads.
Costard. Which is the greatest lady, the highest?
Princess of France. The thickest and the tallest.
Costard. The thickest and the tallest! it is so; truth is truth.
An your waist, mistress, were as slender as my wit,1020
One o' these maids' girdles for your waist should be fit.
Are not you the chief woman? you are the thickest here.
Princess of France. What's your will, sir? what's your will?
Costard. I have a letter from Monsieur Biron to one Lady Rosaline.
Princess of France. O, thy letter, thy letter! he's a good friend of mine:1025
Stand aside, good bearer. Boyet, you can carve;
Break up this capon.
Boyet. I am bound to serve.
This letter is mistook, it importeth none here;
It is writ to Jaquenetta.1030
Princess of France. We will read it, I swear.
Break the neck of the wax, and every one give ear.
[Reads]

Boyet. 'By heaven, that thou art fair, is most infallible;
true, that thou art beauteous; truth itself, that1035
thou art lovely. More fairer than fair, beautiful
than beauteous, truer than truth itself, have
commiseration on thy heroical vassal! The
magnanimous and most illustrate king Cophetua set
eye upon the pernicious and indubitate beggar1040
Zenelophon; and he it was that might rightly say,
Veni, vidi, vici; which to annothanize in the
vulgar,—O base and obscure vulgar!—videlicet, He
came, saw, and overcame: he came, one; saw two;
overcame, three. Who came? the king: why did he1045
come? to see: why did he see? to overcome: to
whom came he? to the beggar: what saw he? the
beggar: who overcame he? the beggar. The
conclusion is victory: on whose side? the king's.
The captive is enriched: on whose side? the1050
beggar's. The catastrophe is a nuptial: on whose
side? the king's: no, on both in one, or one in
both. I am the king; for so stands the comparison:
thou the beggar; for so witnesseth thy lowliness.
Shall I command thy love? I may: shall I enforce1055
thy love? I could: shall I entreat thy love? I
will. What shalt thou exchange for rags? robes;
for tittles? titles; for thyself? me. Thus,
expecting thy reply, I profane my lips on thy foot,
my eyes on thy picture. and my heart on thy every1060
part. Thine, in the dearest design of industry,
DON ADRIANO DE ARMADO.'
Thus dost thou hear the Nemean lion roar
'Gainst thee, thou lamb, that standest as his prey.
Submissive fall his princely feet before,1065
And he from forage will incline to play:
But if thou strive, poor soul, what art thou then?
Food for his rage, repasture for his den.
Princess of France. What plume of feathers is he that indited this letter?
What vane? what weathercock? did you ever hear better?1070
Boyet. I am much deceived but I remember the style.
Princess of France. Else your memory is bad, going o'er it erewhile.
Boyet. This Armado is a Spaniard, that keeps here in court;
A phantasime, a Monarcho, and one that makes sport
To the prince and his bookmates.1075
Princess of France. Thou fellow, a word:
Who gave thee this letter?
Costard. I told you; my lord.
Princess of France. To whom shouldst thou give it?
Costard. From my lord to my lady.1080
Princess of France. From which lord to which lady?
Costard. From my lord Biron, a good master of mine,
To a lady of France that he call'd Rosaline.
Princess of France. Thou hast mistaken his letter. Come, lords, away.
[To ROSALINE]1085
Here, sweet, put up this: 'twill be thine another day.
[Exeunt PRINCESS and train]

Boyet. Who is the suitor? who is the suitor?
Rosaline. Shall I teach you to know?
Boyet. Ay, my continent of beauty.1090
Rosaline. Why, she that bears the bow.
Finely put off!
Boyet. My lady goes to kill horns; but, if thou marry,
Hang me by the neck, if horns that year miscarry.
Finely put on!1095
Rosaline. Well, then, I am the shooter.
Boyet. And who is your deer?
Rosaline. If we choose by the horns, yourself come not near.
Finely put on, indeed!
Maria. You still wrangle with her, Boyet, and she strikes1100
at the brow.
Boyet. But she herself is hit lower: have I hit her now?
Rosaline. Shall I come upon thee with an old saying, that was
a man when King Pepin of France was a little boy, as
touching the hit it?1105
Boyet. So I may answer thee with one as old, that was a
woman when Queen Guinover of Britain was a little
wench, as touching the hit it.
Rosaline. Thou canst not hit it, hit it, hit it,
Thou canst not hit it, my good man.1110
Boyet. An I cannot, cannot, cannot,
An I cannot, another can.
[Exeunt ROSALINE and KATHARINE]

Costard. By my troth, most pleasant: how both did fit it!
Maria. A mark marvellous well shot, for they both did hit it.1115
Boyet. A mark! O, mark but that mark! A mark, says my lady!
Let the mark have a prick in't, to mete at, if it may be.
Maria. Wide o' the bow hand! i' faith, your hand is out.
Costard. Indeed, a' must shoot nearer, or he'll ne'er hit the clout.
Boyet. An if my hand be out, then belike your hand is in.1120
Costard. Then will she get the upshoot by cleaving the pin.
Maria. Come, come, you talk greasily; your lips grow foul.
Costard. She's too hard for you at pricks, sir: challenge her to bowl.
Boyet. I fear too much rubbing. Good night, my good owl.
[Exeunt BOYET and MARIA]

Costard. By my soul, a swain! a most simple clown!
Lord, Lord, how the ladies and I have put him down!
O' my troth, most sweet jests! most incony
vulgar wit!
When it comes so smoothly off, so obscenely, as it1130
were, so fit.
Armado o' th' one side,—O, a most dainty man!
To see him walk before a lady and to bear her fan!
To see him kiss his hand! and how most sweetly a'
will swear!1135
And his page o' t' other side, that handful of wit!
Ah, heavens, it is a most pathetical nit!
Sola, sola!
[Shout within]

[Exit COSTARD, running]

---
. previous scene
Act IV, Scene 2

The same.

     	next scene .
---
[Enter HOLOFERNES, SIR NATHANIEL, and DULL]

Sir Nathaniel. Very reverend sport, truly; and done in the testimony
of a good conscience.
Holofernes. The deer was, as you know, sanguis, in blood; ripe
as the pomewater, who now hangeth like a jewel in1145
the ear of caelo, the sky, the welkin, the heaven;
and anon falleth like a crab on the face of terra,
the soil, the land, the earth.
Sir Nathaniel. Truly, Master Holofernes, the epithets are sweetly
varied, like a scholar at the least: but, sir, I1150
assure ye, it was a buck of the first head.
Holofernes. Sir Nathaniel, haud credo.
Dull. 'Twas not a haud credo; 'twas a pricket.
Holofernes. Most barbarous intimation! yet a kind of
insinuation, as it were, in via, in way, of1155
explication; facere, as it were, replication, or
rather, ostentare, to show, as it were, his
inclination, after his undressed, unpolished,
uneducated, unpruned, untrained, or rather,
unlettered, or ratherest, unconfirmed fashion, to1160
insert again my haud credo for a deer.
Dull. I said the deer was not a haud credo; twas a pricket.
Holofernes. Twice-sod simplicity, his coctus!
O thou monster Ignorance, how deformed dost thou look!
Sir Nathaniel. Sir, he hath never fed of the dainties that are bred1165
in a book; he hath not eat paper, as it were; he
hath not drunk ink: his intellect is not
replenished; he is only an animal, only sensible in
the duller parts:
And such barren plants are set before us, that we1170
thankful should be,
Which we of taste and feeling are, for those parts that
do fructify in us more than he.
For as it would ill become me to be vain, indiscreet, or a fool,
So were there a patch set on learning, to see him in a school:1175
But omne bene, say I; being of an old father's mind,
Many can brook the weather that love not the wind.
Dull. You two are book-men: can you tell me by your wit
What was a month old at Cain's birth, that's not five
weeks old as yet?1180
Holofernes. Dictynna, goodman Dull; Dictynna, goodman Dull.
Dull. What is Dictynna?
Sir Nathaniel. A title to Phoebe, to Luna, to the moon.
Holofernes. The moon was a month old when Adam was no more,
And raught not to five weeks when he came to1185
five-score.
The allusion holds in the exchange.
Dull. 'Tis true indeed; the collusion holds in the exchange.
Holofernes. God comfort thy capacity! I say, the allusion holds
in the exchange.1190
Dull. And I say, the pollusion holds in the exchange; for
the moon is never but a month old: and I say beside
that, 'twas a pricket that the princess killed.
Holofernes. Sir Nathaniel, will you hear an extemporal epitaph
on the death of the deer? And, to humour the1195
ignorant, call I the deer the princess killed a pricket.
Sir Nathaniel. Perge, good Master Holofernes, perge; so it shall
please you to abrogate scurrility.
Holofernes. I will something affect the letter, for it argues facility.
The preyful princess pierced and prick'd a pretty1200
pleasing pricket;
Some say a sore; but not a sore, till now made
sore with shooting.
The dogs did yell: put L to sore, then sorel jumps
from thicket;1205
Or pricket sore, or else sorel; the people fall a-hooting.
If sore be sore, then L to sore makes fifty sores
one sorel.
Of one sore I an hundred make by adding but one more L.
Sir Nathaniel. A rare talent!1210
Dull. [Aside] If a talent be a claw, look how he claws
him with a talent.
Holofernes. This is a gift that I have, simple, simple; a
foolish extravagant spirit, full of forms, figures,
shapes, objects, ideas, apprehensions, motions,1215
revolutions: these are begot in the ventricle of
memory, nourished in the womb of pia mater, and
delivered upon the mellowing of occasion. But the
gift is good in those in whom it is acute, and I am
thankful for it.1220
Sir Nathaniel. Sir, I praise the Lord for you; and so may my
parishioners; for their sons are well tutored by
you, and their daughters profit very greatly under
you: you are a good member of the commonwealth.
Holofernes. Mehercle, if their sons be ingenuous, they shall1225
want no instruction; if their daughters be capable,
I will put it to them: but vir sapit qui pauca
loquitur; a soul feminine saluteth us.
[Enter JAQUENETTA and COSTARD]

Jaquenetta. God give you good morrow, master Parson.1230
Holofernes. Master Parson, quasi pers-on. An if one should be
pierced, which is the one?
Costard. Marry, master schoolmaster, he that is likest to a hogshead.
Holofernes. Piercing a hogshead! a good lustre of conceit in a
tuft of earth; fire enough for a flint, pearl enough1235
for a swine: 'tis pretty; it is well.
Jaquenetta. Good master Parson, be so good as read me this
letter: it was given me by Costard, and sent me
from Don Armado: I beseech you, read it.
Holofernes. Fauste, precor gelida quando pecus omne sub umbra1240
Ruminat,—and so forth. Ah, good old Mantuan! I
may speak of thee as the traveller doth of Venice;
Venetia, Venetia,
Chi non ti vede non ti pretia.
Old Mantuan, old Mantuan! who understandeth thee1245
not, loves thee not. Ut, re, sol, la, mi, fa.
Under pardon, sir, what are the contents? or rather,
as Horace says in his—What, my soul, verses?
Sir Nathaniel. Ay, sir, and very learned.
Holofernes. Let me hear a staff, a stanze, a verse; lege, domine.1250
Sir Nathaniel. [Reads]
If love make me forsworn, how shall I swear to love?
Ah, never faith could hold, if not to beauty vow'd!
Though to myself forsworn, to thee I'll faithful prove:
Those thoughts to me were oaks, to thee like1255
osiers bow'd.
Study his bias leaves and makes his book thine eyes,
Where all those pleasures live that art would
comprehend:
If knowledge be the mark, to know thee shall suffice;1260
Well learned is that tongue that well can thee commend,
All ignorant that soul that sees thee without wonder;
Which is to me some praise that I thy parts admire:
Thy eye Jove's lightning bears, thy voice his dreadful thunder,
Which not to anger bent, is music and sweet fire.1265
Celestial as thou art, O, pardon, love, this wrong,
That sings heaven's praise with such an earthly tongue.
Holofernes. You find not the apostraphas, and so miss the
accent: let me supervise the canzonet. Here are
only numbers ratified; but, for the elegancy,1270
facility, and golden cadence of poesy, caret.
Ovidius Naso was the man: and why, indeed, Naso,
but for smelling out the odouriferous flowers of
fancy, the jerks of invention? Imitari is nothing:
so doth the hound his master, the ape his keeper,1275
the tired horse his rider. But, damosella virgin,
was this directed to you?
Jaquenetta. Ay, sir, from one Monsieur Biron, one of the strange
queen's lords.
Holofernes. I will overglance the superscript: 'To the1280
snow-white hand of the most beauteous Lady
Rosaline.' I will look again on the intellect of
the letter, for the nomination of the party writing
to the person written unto: 'Your ladyship's in all
desired employment, BIRON.' Sir Nathaniel, this1285
Biron is one of the votaries with the king; and here
he hath framed a letter to a sequent of the stranger
queen's, which accidentally, or by the way of
progression, hath miscarried. Trip and go, my
sweet; deliver this paper into the royal hand of the1290
king: it may concern much. Stay not thy
compliment; I forgive thy duty; adieu.
Jaquenetta. Good Costard, go with me. Sir, God save your life!
Costard. Have with thee, my girl.
[Exeunt COSTARD and JAQUENETTA]

Sir Nathaniel. Sir, you have done this in the fear of God, very
religiously; and, as a certain father saith,—
Holofernes. Sir tell me not of the father; I do fear colourable
colours. But to return to the verses: did they
please you, Sir Nathaniel?1300
Sir Nathaniel. Marvellous well for the pen.
Holofernes. I do dine to-day at the father's of a certain pupil
of mine; where, if, before repast, it shall please
you to gratify the table with a grace, I will, on my
privilege I have with the parents of the foresaid1305
child or pupil, undertake your ben venuto; where I
will prove those verses to be very unlearned,
neither savouring of poetry, wit, nor invention: I
beseech your society.
Sir Nathaniel. And thank you too; for society, saith the text, is1310
the happiness of life.
Holofernes. And, certes, the text most infallibly concludes it.
[To DULL]
Sir, I do invite you too; you shall not
say me nay: pauca verba. Away! the gentles are at1315
their game, and we will to our recreation.
[Exeunt]

---
. previous scene
Act IV, Scene 3

The same.

     	next scene .
---
[Enter BIRON, with a paper]

Biron. The king he is hunting the deer; I am coursing
myself: they have pitched a toil; I am toiling in1320
a pitch,—pitch that defiles: defile! a foul
word. Well, set thee down, sorrow! for so they say
the fool said, and so say I, and I the fool: well
proved, wit! By the Lord, this love is as mad as
Ajax: it kills sheep; it kills me, I a sheep:1325
well proved again o' my side! I will not love: if
I do, hang me; i' faith, I will not. O, but her
eye,—by this light, but for her eye, I would not
love her; yes, for her two eyes. Well, I do nothing
in the world but lie, and lie in my throat. By1330
heaven, I do love: and it hath taught me to rhyme
and to be melancholy; and here is part of my rhyme,
and here my melancholy. Well, she hath one o' my
sonnets already: the clown bore it, the fool sent
it, and the lady hath it: sweet clown, sweeter1335
fool, sweetest lady! By the world, I would not care
a pin, if the other three were in. Here comes one
with a paper: God give him grace to groan!
[Stands aside]

[Enter FERDINAND, with a paper]

Ferdinand. Ay me!
Biron. [Aside] Shot, by heaven! Proceed, sweet Cupid:
thou hast thumped him with thy bird-bolt under the
left pap. In faith, secrets!
Ferdinand. [Reads]1345
So sweet a kiss the golden sun gives not
To those fresh morning drops upon the rose,
As thy eye-beams, when their fresh rays have smote
The night of dew that on my cheeks down flows:
Nor shines the silver moon one half so bright1350
Through the transparent bosom of the deep,
As doth thy face through tears of mine give light;
Thou shinest in every tear that I do weep:
No drop but as a coach doth carry thee;
So ridest thou triumphing in my woe.1355
Do but behold the tears that swell in me,
And they thy glory through my grief will show:
But do not love thyself; then thou wilt keep
My tears for glasses, and still make me weep.
O queen of queens! how far dost thou excel,1360
No thought can think, nor tongue of mortal tell.
How shall she know my griefs? I'll drop the paper:
Sweet leaves, shade folly. Who is he comes here?
[Steps aside]
What, Longaville! and reading! listen, ear.1365
Biron. Now, in thy likeness, one more fool appear!
[Enter LONGAVILLE, with a paper]

Longaville. Ay me, I am forsworn!
Biron. Why, he comes in like a perjure, wearing papers.
Ferdinand. In love, I hope: sweet fellowship in shame!1370
Biron. One drunkard loves another of the name.
Longaville. Am I the first that have been perjured so?
Biron. I could put thee in comfort. Not by two that I know:
Thou makest the triumviry, the corner-cap of society,
The shape of Love's Tyburn that hangs up simplicity.1375
Longaville. I fear these stubborn lines lack power to move:
O sweet Maria, empress of my love!
These numbers will I tear, and write in prose.
Biron. O, rhymes are guards on wanton Cupid's hose:
Disfigure not his slop.1380
Longaville. This same shall go.
[Reads]
Did not the heavenly rhetoric of thine eye,
'Gainst whom the world cannot hold argument,
Persuade my heart to this false perjury?1385
Vows for thee broke deserve not punishment.
A woman I forswore; but I will prove,
Thou being a goddess, I forswore not thee:
My vow was earthly, thou a heavenly love;
Thy grace being gain'd cures all disgrace in me.1390
Vows are but breath, and breath a vapour is:
Then thou, fair sun, which on my earth dost shine,
Exhalest this vapour-vow; in thee it is:
If broken then, it is no fault of mine:
If by me broke, what fool is not so wise1395
To lose an oath to win a paradise?
Biron. This is the liver-vein, which makes flesh a deity,
A green goose a goddess: pure, pure idolatry.
God amend us, God amend! we are much out o' the way.
Longaville. By whom shall I send this?—Company! stay.1400
[Steps aside]

Biron. All hid, all hid; an old infant play.
Like a demigod here sit I in the sky.
And wretched fools' secrets heedfully o'ereye.
More sacks to the mill! O heavens, I have my wish!1405
[Enter DUMAIN, with a paper]
Dumain transform'd! four woodcocks in a dish!
Dumain. O most divine Kate!
Biron. O most profane coxcomb!
Dumain. By heaven, the wonder in a mortal eye!1410
Biron. By earth, she is not, corporal, there you lie.
Dumain. Her amber hair for foul hath amber quoted.
Biron. An amber-colour'd raven was well noted.
Dumain. As upright as the cedar.
Biron. Stoop, I say;1415
Her shoulder is with child.
Dumain. As fair as day.
Biron. Ay, as some days; but then no sun must shine.
Dumain. O that I had my wish!
Longaville. And I had mine!1420
Ferdinand. And I mine too, good Lord!
Biron. Amen, so I had mine: is not that a good word?
Dumain. I would forget her; but a fever she
Reigns in my blood and will remember'd be.
Biron. A fever in your blood! why, then incision1425
Would let her out in saucers: sweet misprision!
Dumain. Once more I'll read the ode that I have writ.
Biron. Once more I'll mark how love can vary wit.
Dumain. [Reads]
On a day—alack the day!—1430
Love, whose month is ever May,
Spied a blossom passing fair
Playing in the wanton air:
Through the velvet leaves the wind,
All unseen, can passage find;1435
That the lover, sick to death,
Wish himself the heaven's breath.
Air, quoth he, thy cheeks may blow;
Air, would I might triumph so!
But, alack, my hand is sworn1440
Ne'er to pluck thee from thy thorn;
Vow, alack, for youth unmeet,
Youth so apt to pluck a sweet!
Do not call it sin in me,
That I am forsworn for thee;1445
Thou for whom Jove would swear
Juno but an Ethiope were;
And deny himself for Jove,
Turning mortal for thy love.
This will I send, and something else more plain,1450
That shall express my true love's fasting pain.
O, would the king, Biron, and Longaville,
Were lovers too! Ill, to example ill,
Would from my forehead wipe a perjured note;
For none offend where all alike do dote.1455
Longaville. [Advancing] Dumain, thy love is far from charity.
You may look pale, but I should blush, I know,
To be o'erheard and taken napping so.
Ferdinand. [Advancing] Come, sir, you blush; as his your case is such;
You chide at him, offending twice as much;1460
You do not love Maria; Longaville
Did never sonnet for her sake compile,
Nor never lay his wreathed arms athwart
His loving bosom to keep down his heart.
I have been closely shrouded in this bush1465
And mark'd you both and for you both did blush:
I heard your guilty rhymes, observed your fashion,
Saw sighs reek from you, noted well your passion:
Ay me! says one; O Jove! the other cries;
One, her hairs were gold, crystal the other's eyes:1470
[To LONGAVILLE]
You would for paradise break faith, and troth;
[To DUMAIN]
And Jove, for your love, would infringe an oath.
What will Biron say when that he shall hear1475
Faith so infringed, which such zeal did swear?
How will he scorn! how will he spend his wit!
How will he triumph, leap and laugh at it!
For all the wealth that ever I did see,
I would not have him know so much by me.1480
Biron. Now step I forth to whip hypocrisy.
[Advancing]
Ah, good my liege, I pray thee, pardon me!
Good heart, what grace hast thou, thus to reprove
These worms for loving, that art most in love?1485
Your eyes do make no coaches; in your tears
There is no certain princess that appears;
You'll not be perjured, 'tis a hateful thing;
Tush, none but minstrels like of sonneting!
But are you not ashamed? nay, are you not,1490
All three of you, to be thus much o'ershot?
You found his mote; the king your mote did see;
But I a beam do find in each of three.
O, what a scene of foolery have I seen,
Of sighs, of groans, of sorrow and of teen!1495
O me, with what strict patience have I sat,
To see a king transformed to a gnat!
To see great Hercules whipping a gig,
And profound Solomon to tune a jig,
And Nestor play at push-pin with the boys,1500
And critic Timon laugh at idle toys!
Where lies thy grief, O, tell me, good Dumain?
And gentle Longaville, where lies thy pain?
And where my liege's? all about the breast:
A caudle, ho!1505
Ferdinand. Too bitter is thy jest.
Are we betray'd thus to thy over-view?
Biron. Not you to me, but I betray'd by you:
I, that am honest; I, that hold it sin
To break the vow I am engaged in;1510
I am betray'd, by keeping company
With men like men of inconstancy.
When shall you see me write a thing in rhyme?
Or groan for love? or spend a minute's time
In pruning me? When shall you hear that I1515
Will praise a hand, a foot, a face, an eye,
A gait, a state, a brow, a breast, a waist,
A leg, a limb?
Ferdinand. Soft! whither away so fast?
A true man or a thief that gallops so?1520
Biron. I post from love: good lover, let me go.
[Enter JAQUENETTA and COSTARD]

Jaquenetta. God bless the king!
Ferdinand. What present hast thou there?
Costard. Some certain treason.1525
Ferdinand. What makes treason here?
Costard. Nay, it makes nothing, sir.
Ferdinand. If it mar nothing neither,
The treason and you go in peace away together.
Jaquenetta. I beseech your grace, let this letter be read:1530
Our parson misdoubts it; 'twas treason, he said.
Ferdinand. Biron, read it over.
[Giving him the paper]
Where hadst thou it?
Jaquenetta. Of Costard.1535
Ferdinand. Where hadst thou it?
Costard. Of Dun Adramadio, Dun Adramadio.
[BIRON tears the letter]

Ferdinand. How now! what is in you? why dost thou tear it?
Biron. A toy, my liege, a toy: your grace needs not fear it.1540
Longaville. It did move him to passion, and therefore let's hear it.
Dumain. It is Biron's writing, and here is his name.
[Gathering up the pieces]

Biron. [To COSTARD] Ah, you whoreson loggerhead! you were
born to do me shame.1545
Guilty, my lord, guilty! I confess, I confess.
Ferdinand. What?
Biron. That you three fools lack'd me fool to make up the mess:
He, he, and you, and you, my liege, and I,
Are pick-purses in love, and we deserve to die.1550
O, dismiss this audience, and I shall tell you more.
Dumain. Now the number is even.
Biron. True, true; we are four.
Will these turtles be gone?
Ferdinand. Hence, sirs; away!1555
Costard. Walk aside the true folk, and let the traitors stay.
[Exeunt COSTARD and JAQUENETTA]

Biron. Sweet lords, sweet lovers, O, let us embrace!
As true we are as flesh and blood can be:
The sea will ebb and flow, heaven show his face;1560
Young blood doth not obey an old decree:
We cannot cross the cause why we were born;
Therefore of all hands must we be forsworn.
Ferdinand. What, did these rent lines show some love of thine?
Biron. Did they, quoth you? Who sees the heavenly Rosaline,1565
That, like a rude and savage man of Inde,
At the first opening of the gorgeous east,
Bows not his vassal head and strucken blind
Kisses the base ground with obedient breast?
What peremptory eagle-sighted eye1570
Dares look upon the heaven of her brow,
That is not blinded by her majesty?
Ferdinand. What zeal, what fury hath inspired thee now?
My love, her mistress, is a gracious moon;
She an attending star, scarce seen a light.1575
Biron. My eyes are then no eyes, nor I Biron:
O, but for my love, day would turn to night!
Of all complexions the cull'd sovereignty
Do meet, as at a fair, in her fair cheek,
Where several worthies make one dignity,1580
Where nothing wants that want itself doth seek.
Lend me the flourish of all gentle tongues,—
Fie, painted rhetoric! O, she needs it not:
To things of sale a seller's praise belongs,
She passes praise; then praise too short doth blot.1585
A wither'd hermit, five-score winters worn,
Might shake off fifty, looking in her eye:
Beauty doth varnish age, as if new-born,
And gives the crutch the cradle's infancy:
O, 'tis the sun that maketh all things shine.1590
Ferdinand. By heaven, thy love is black as ebony.
Biron. Is ebony like her? O wood divine!
A wife of such wood were felicity.
O, who can give an oath? where is a book?
That I may swear beauty doth beauty lack,1595
If that she learn not of her eye to look:
No face is fair that is not full so black.
Ferdinand. O paradox! Black is the badge of hell,
The hue of dungeons and the suit of night;
And beauty's crest becomes the heavens well.1600
Biron. Devils soonest tempt, resembling spirits of light.
O, if in black my lady's brows be deck'd,
It mourns that painting and usurping hair
Should ravish doters with a false aspect;
And therefore is she born to make black fair.1605
Her favour turns the fashion of the days,
For native blood is counted painting now;
And therefore red, that would avoid dispraise,
Paints itself black, to imitate her brow.
Dumain. To look like her are chimney-sweepers black.1610
Longaville. And since her time are colliers counted bright.
Ferdinand. And Ethiopes of their sweet complexion crack.
Dumain. Dark needs no candles now, for dark is light.
Biron. Your mistresses dare never come in rain,
For fear their colours should be wash'd away.1615
Ferdinand. 'Twere good, yours did; for, sir, to tell you plain,
I'll find a fairer face not wash'd to-day.
Biron. I'll prove her fair, or talk till doomsday here.
Ferdinand. No devil will fright thee then so much as she.
Dumain. I never knew man hold vile stuff so dear.1620
Longaville. Look, here's thy love: my foot and her face see.
Biron. O, if the streets were paved with thine eyes,
Her feet were much too dainty for such tread!
Dumain. O, vile! then, as she goes, what upward lies
The street should see as she walk'd overhead.1625
Ferdinand. But what of this? are we not all in love?
Biron. Nothing so sure; and thereby all forsworn.
Ferdinand. Then leave this chat; and, good Biron, now prove
Our loving lawful, and our faith not torn.
Dumain. Ay, marry, there; some flattery for this evil.1630
Longaville. O, some authority how to proceed;
Some tricks, some quillets, how to cheat the devil.
Dumain. Some salve for perjury.
Biron. 'Tis more than need.
Have at you, then, affection's men at arms.1635
Consider what you first did swear unto,
To fast, to study, and to see no woman;
Flat treason 'gainst the kingly state of youth.
Say, can you fast? your stomachs are too young;
And abstinence engenders maladies.1640
And where that you have vow'd to study, lords,
In that each of you have forsworn his book,
Can you still dream and pore and thereon look?
For when would you, my lord, or you, or you,
Have found the ground of study's excellence1645
Without the beauty of a woman's face?
[From women's eyes this doctrine I derive;]
They are the ground, the books, the academes
From whence doth spring the true Promethean fire]
Why, universal plodding poisons up1650
The nimble spirits in the arteries,
As motion and long-during action tires
The sinewy vigour of the traveller.
Now, for not looking on a woman's face,
You have in that forsworn the use of eyes1655
And study too, the causer of your vow;
For where is any author in the world
Teaches such beauty as a woman's eye?
Learning is but an adjunct to ourself
And where we are our learning likewise is:1660
Then when ourselves we see in ladies' eyes,
Do we not likewise see our learning there?
O, we have made a vow to study, lords,
And in that vow we have forsworn our books.
For when would you, my liege, or you, or you,1665
In leaden contemplation have found out
Such fiery numbers as the prompting eyes
Of beauty's tutors have enrich'd you with?
Other slow arts entirely keep the brain;
And therefore, finding barren practisers,1670
Scarce show a harvest of their heavy toil:
But love, first learned in a lady's eyes,
Lives not alone immured in the brain;
But, with the motion of all elements,
Courses as swift as thought in every power,1675
And gives to every power a double power,
Above their functions and their offices.
It adds a precious seeing to the eye;
A lover's eyes will gaze an eagle blind;
A lover's ear will hear the lowest sound,1680
When the suspicious head of theft is stopp'd:
Love's feeling is more soft and sensible
Than are the tender horns of cockl'd snails;
Love's tongue proves dainty Bacchus gross in taste:
For valour, is not Love a Hercules,1685
Still climbing trees in the Hesperides?
Subtle as Sphinx; as sweet and musical
As bright Apollo's lute, strung with his hair:
And when Love speaks, the voice of all the gods
Makes heaven drowsy with the harmony.1690
Never durst poet touch a pen to write
Until his ink were temper'd with Love's sighs;
O, then his lines would ravish savage ears
And plant in tyrants mild humility.
From women's eyes this doctrine I derive:1695
They sparkle still the right Promethean fire;
They are the books, the arts, the academes,
That show, contain and nourish all the world:
Else none at all in ought proves excellent.
Then fools you were these women to forswear,1700
Or keeping what is sworn, you will prove fools.
For wisdom's sake, a word that all men love,
Or for love's sake, a word that loves all men,
Or for men's sake, the authors of these women,
Or women's sake, by whom we men are men,1705
Let us once lose our oaths to find ourselves,
Or else we lose ourselves to keep our oaths.
It is religion to be thus forsworn,
For charity itself fulfills the law,
And who can sever love from charity?1710
Ferdinand. Saint Cupid, then! and, soldiers, to the field!
Biron. Advance your standards, and upon them, lords;
Pell-mell, down with them! but be first advised,
In conflict that you get the sun of them.
Longaville. Now to plain-dealing; lay these glozes by:1715
Shall we resolve to woo these girls of France?
Ferdinand. And win them too: therefore let us devise
Some entertainment for them in their tents.
Biron. First, from the park let us conduct them thither;
Then homeward every man attach the hand1720
Of his fair mistress: in the afternoon
We will with some strange pastime solace them,
Such as the shortness of the time can shape;
For revels, dances, masks and merry hours
Forerun fair Love, strewing her way with flowers.1725
Ferdinand. Away, away! no time shall be omitted
That will betime, and may by us be fitted.
Biron. Allons! allons! Sow'd cockle reap'd no corn;
And justice always whirls in equal measure:
Light wenches may prove plagues to men forsworn;1730
If so, our copper buys no better treasure.
[Exeunt]

---
. previous scene
Act V, Scene 1

The same.

     	next scene .
---
[Enter HOLOFERNES, SIR NATHANIEL, and DULL]

Holofernes. Satis quod sufficit.
Sir Nathaniel. I praise God for you, sir: your reasons at dinner1735
have been sharp and sententious; pleasant without
scurrility, witty without affection, audacious without
impudency, learned without opinion, and strange with-
out heresy. I did converse this quondam day with
a companion of the king's, who is intituled, nomi-1740
nated, or called, Don Adriano de Armado.
Holofernes. Novi hominem tanquam te: his humour is lofty, his
discourse peremptory, his tongue filed, his eye
ambitious, his gait majestical, and his general
behavior vain, ridiculous, and thrasonical. He is1745
too picked, too spruce, too affected, too odd, as it
were, too peregrinate, as I may call it.
Sir Nathaniel. A most singular and choice epithet.
[Draws out his table-book]

Holofernes. He draweth out the thread of his verbosity finer1750
than the staple of his argument. I abhor such
fanatical phantasimes, such insociable and
point-devise companions; such rackers of
orthography, as to speak dout, fine, when he should
say doubt; det, when he should pronounce debt,—d,1755
e, b, t, not d, e, t: he clepeth a calf, cauf;
half, hauf; neighbour vocatur nebor; neigh
abbreviated ne. This is abhominable,—which he
would call abbominable: it insinuateth me of
insanie: anne intelligis, domine? to make frantic, lunatic.1760
Sir Nathaniel. Laus Deo, bene intelligo.
Holofernes. Bon, bon, fort bon, Priscian! a little scratch'd,
'twill serve.
Sir Nathaniel. Videsne quis venit?
Holofernes. Video, et gaudeo.1765
[Enter DON ADRIANO DE ARMADO, MOTH, and COSTARD]

Don Adriano de Armado. Chirrah!
[To MOTH]

Holofernes. Quare chirrah, not sirrah?
Don Adriano de Armado. Men of peace, well encountered.1770
Holofernes. Most military sir, salutation.
Moth. [Aside to COSTARD] They have been at a great feast
of languages, and stolen the scraps.
Costard. O, they have lived long on the alms-basket of words.
I marvel thy master hath not eaten thee for a word;1775
for thou art not so long by the head as
honorificabilitudinitatibus: thou art easier
swallowed than a flap-dragon.
Moth. Peace! the peal begins.
Don Adriano de Armado. [To HOLOFERNES] Monsieur, are you not lettered?1780
Moth. Yes, yes; he teaches boys the hornbook. What is a,
b, spelt backward, with the horn on his head?
Holofernes. Ba, pueritia, with a horn added.
Moth. Ba, most silly sheep with a horn. You hear his learning.
Holofernes. Quis, quis, thou consonant?1785
Moth. The third of the five vowels, if you repeat them; or
the fifth, if I.
Holofernes. I will repeat them,—a, e, i,—
Moth. The sheep: the other two concludes it,—o, u.
Don Adriano de Armado. Now, by the salt wave of the Mediterraneum, a sweet1790
touch, a quick venue of wit! snip, snap, quick and
home! it rejoiceth my intellect: true wit!
Moth. Offered by a child to an old man; which is wit-old.
Holofernes. What is the figure? what is the figure?
Moth. Horns.1795
Holofernes. Thou disputest like an infant: go, whip thy gig.
Moth. Lend me your horn to make one, and I will whip about
your infamy circum circa,—a gig of a cuckold's horn.
Costard. An I had but one penny in the world, thou shouldst
have it to buy gingerbread: hold, there is the very1800
remuneration I had of thy master, thou halfpenny
purse of wit, thou pigeon-egg of discretion. O, an
the heavens were so pleased that thou wert but my
bastard, what a joyful father wouldst thou make me!
Go to; thou hast it ad dunghill, at the fingers'1805
ends, as they say.
Holofernes. O, I smell false Latin; dunghill for unguem.
Don Adriano de Armado. Arts-man, preambulate, we will be singled from the
barbarous. Do you not educate youth at the
charge-house on the top of the mountain?1810
Holofernes. Or mons, the hill.
Don Adriano de Armado. At your sweet pleasure, for the mountain.
Holofernes. I do, sans question.
Don Adriano de Armado. Sir, it is the king's most sweet pleasure and
affection to congratulate the princess at her1815
pavilion in the posteriors of this day, which the
rude multitude call the afternoon.
Holofernes. The posterior of the day, most generous sir, is
liable, congruent and measurable for the afternoon:
the word is well culled, chose, sweet and apt, I do1820
assure you, sir, I do assure.
Don Adriano de Armado. Sir, the king is a noble gentleman, and my familiar,
I do assure ye, very good friend: for what is
inward between us, let it pass. I do beseech thee,
remember thy courtesy; I beseech thee, apparel thy1825
head: and among other important and most serious
designs, and of great import indeed, too, but let
that pass: for I must tell thee, it will please his
grace, by the world, sometime to lean upon my poor
shoulder, and with his royal finger, thus, dally1830
with my excrement, with my mustachio; but, sweet
heart, let that pass. By the world, I recount no
fable: some certain special honours it pleaseth his
greatness to impart to Armado, a soldier, a man of
travel, that hath seen the world; but let that pass.1835
The very all of all is,—but, sweet heart, I do
implore secrecy,—that the king would have me
present the princess, sweet chuck, with some
delightful ostentation, or show, or pageant, or
antique, or firework. Now, understanding that the1840
curate and your sweet self are good at such
eruptions and sudden breaking out of mirth, as it
were, I have acquainted you withal, to the end to
crave your assistance.
Holofernes. Sir, you shall present before her the Nine Worthies.1845
Sir, as concerning some entertainment of time, some
show in the posterior of this day, to be rendered by
our assistants, at the king's command, and this most
gallant, illustrate, and learned gentleman, before
the princess; I say none so fit as to present the1850
Nine Worthies.
Sir Nathaniel. Where will you find men worthy enough to present them?
Holofernes. Joshua, yourself; myself and this gallant gentleman,
Judas Maccabaeus; this swain, because of his great
limb or joint, shall pass Pompey the Great; the1855
page, Hercules,—
Don Adriano de Armado. Pardon, sir; error: he is not quantity enough for
that Worthy's thumb: he is not so big as the end of his club.
Holofernes. Shall I have audience? he shall present Hercules in
minority: his enter and exit shall be strangling a1860
snake; and I will have an apology for that purpose.
Moth. An excellent device! so, if any of the audience
hiss, you may cry 'Well done, Hercules! now thou
crushest the snake!' that is the way to make an
offence gracious, though few have the grace to do it.1865
Don Adriano de Armado. For the rest of the Worthies?—
Holofernes. I will play three myself.
Moth. Thrice-worthy gentleman!
Don Adriano de Armado. Shall I tell you a thing?
Holofernes. We attend.1870
Don Adriano de Armado. We will have, if this fadge not, an antique. I
beseech you, follow.
Holofernes. Via, goodman Dull! thou hast spoken no word all this while.
Dull. Nor understood none neither, sir.
Holofernes. Allons! we will employ thee.1875
Dull. I'll make one in a dance, or so; or I will play
On the tabour to the Worthies, and let them dance the hay.
Holofernes. Most dull, honest Dull! To our sport, away!
[Exeunt]

---
. previous scene
Act V, Scene 2

The same.


---
[Enter the PRINCESS, KATHARINE, ROSALINE, and MARIA]

Princess of France. Sweet hearts, we shall be rich ere we depart,
If fairings come thus plentifully in:
A lady wall'd about with diamonds!
Look you what I have from the loving king.
Rosaline. Madame, came nothing else along with that?1885
Princess of France. Nothing but this! yes, as much love in rhyme
As would be cramm'd up in a sheet of paper,
Writ o' both sides the leaf, margent and all,
That he was fain to seal on Cupid's name.
Rosaline. That was the way to make his godhead wax,1890
For he hath been five thousand years a boy.
Katharine. Ay, and a shrewd unhappy gallows too.
Rosaline. You'll ne'er be friends with him; a' kill'd your sister.
Katharine. He made her melancholy, sad, and heavy;
And so she died: had she been light, like you,1895
Of such a merry, nimble, stirring spirit,
She might ha' been a grandam ere she died:
And so may you; for a light heart lives long.
Rosaline. What's your dark meaning, mouse, of this light word?
Katharine. A light condition in a beauty dark.1900
Rosaline. We need more light to find your meaning out.
Katharine. You'll mar the light by taking it in snuff;
Therefore I'll darkly end the argument.
Rosaline. Look what you do, you do it still i' the dark.
Katharine. So do not you, for you are a light wench.1905
Rosaline. Indeed I weigh not you, and therefore light.
Katharine. You weigh me not? O, that's you care not for me.
Rosaline. Great reason; for 'past cure is still past care.'
Princess of France. Well bandied both; a set of wit well play'd.
But Rosaline, you have a favour too:1910
Who sent it? and what is it?
Rosaline. I would you knew:
An if my face were but as fair as yours,
My favour were as great; be witness this.
Nay, I have verses too, I thank Biron:1915
The numbers true; and, were the numbering too,
I were the fairest goddess on the ground:
I am compared to twenty thousand fairs.
O, he hath drawn my picture in his letter!
Princess of France. Any thing like?1920
Rosaline. Much in the letters; nothing in the praise.
Princess of France. Beauteous as ink; a good conclusion.
Katharine. Fair as a text B in a copy-book.
Rosaline. 'Ware pencils, ho! let me not die your debtor,
My red dominical, my golden letter:1925
O, that your face were not so full of O's!
Katharine. A pox of that jest! and I beshrew all shrows.
Princess of France. But, Katharine, what was sent to you from fair Dumain?
Katharine. Madam, this glove.
Princess of France. Did he not send you twain?1930
Katharine. Yes, madam, and moreover
Some thousand verses of a faithful lover,
A huge translation of hypocrisy,
Vilely compiled, profound simplicity.
Maria. This and these pearls to me sent Longaville:1935
The letter is too long by half a mile.
Princess of France. I think no less. Dost thou not wish in heart
The chain were longer and the letter short?
Maria. Ay, or I would these hands might never part.
Princess of France. We are wise girls to mock our lovers so.1940
Rosaline. They are worse fools to purchase mocking so.
That same Biron I'll torture ere I go:
O that I knew he were but in by the week!
How I would make him fawn and beg and seek
And wait the season and observe the times1945
And spend his prodigal wits in bootless rhymes
And shape his service wholly to my hests
And make him proud to make me proud that jests!
So perttaunt-like would I o'ersway his state
That he should be my fool and I his fate.1950
Princess of France. None are so surely caught, when they are catch'd,
As wit turn'd fool: folly, in wisdom hatch'd,
Hath wisdom's warrant and the help of school
And wit's own grace to grace a learned fool.
Rosaline. The blood of youth burns not with such excess1955
As gravity's revolt to wantonness.
Maria. Folly in fools bears not so strong a note
As foolery in the wise, when wit doth dote;
Since all the power thereof it doth apply
To prove, by wit, worth in simplicity.1960
Princess of France. Here comes Boyet, and mirth is in his face.
[Enter BOYET]

Boyet. O, I am stabb'd with laughter! Where's her grace?
Princess of France. Thy news Boyet?
Boyet. Prepare, madam, prepare!1965
Arm, wenches, arm! encounters mounted are
Against your peace: Love doth approach disguised,
Armed in arguments; you'll be surprised:
Muster your wits; stand in your own defence;
Or hide your heads like cowards, and fly hence.1970
Princess of France. Saint Denis to Saint Cupid! What are they
That charge their breath against us? say, scout, say.
Boyet. Under the cool shade of a sycamore
I thought to close mine eyes some half an hour;
When, lo! to interrupt my purposed rest,1975
Toward that shade I might behold addrest
The king and his companions: warily
I stole into a neighbour thicket by,
And overheard what you shall overhear,
That, by and by, disguised they will be here.1980
Their herald is a pretty knavish page,
That well by heart hath conn'd his embassage:
Action and accent did they teach him there;
'Thus must thou speak,' and 'thus thy body bear:'
And ever and anon they made a doubt1985
Presence majestical would put him out,
'For,' quoth the king, 'an angel shalt thou see;
Yet fear not thou, but speak audaciously.'
The boy replied, 'An angel is not evil;
I should have fear'd her had she been a devil.'1990
With that, all laugh'd and clapp'd him on the shoulder,
Making the bold wag by their praises bolder:
One rubb'd his elbow thus, and fleer'd and swore
A better speech was never spoke before;
Another, with his finger and his thumb,1995
Cried, 'Via! we will do't, come what will come;'
The third he caper'd, and cried, 'All goes well;'
The fourth turn'd on the toe, and down he fell.
With that, they all did tumble on the ground,
With such a zealous laughter, so profound,2000
That in this spleen ridiculous appears,
To cheque their folly, passion's solemn tears.
Princess of France. But what, but what, come they to visit us?
Boyet. They do, they do: and are apparell'd thus.
Like Muscovites or Russians, as I guess.2005
Their purpose is to parle, to court and dance;
And every one his love-feat will advance
Unto his several mistress, which they'll know
By favours several which they did bestow.
Princess of France. And will they so? the gallants shall be task'd;2010
For, ladies, we shall every one be mask'd;
And not a man of them shall have the grace,
Despite of suit, to see a lady's face.
Hold, Rosaline, this favour thou shalt wear,
And then the king will court thee for his dear;2015
Hold, take thou this, my sweet, and give me thine,
So shall Biron take me for Rosaline.
And change your favours too; so shall your loves
Woo contrary, deceived by these removes.
Rosaline. Come on, then; wear the favours most in sight.2020
Katharine. But in this changing what is your intent?
Princess of France. The effect of my intent is to cross theirs:
They do it but in mocking merriment;
And mock for mock is only my intent.
Their several counsels they unbosom shall2025
To loves mistook, and so be mock'd withal
Upon the next occasion that we meet,
With visages displayed, to talk and greet.
Rosaline. But shall we dance, if they desire to't?
Princess of France. No, to the death, we will not move a foot;2030
Nor to their penn'd speech render we no grace,
But while 'tis spoke each turn away her face.
Boyet. Why, that contempt will kill the speaker's heart,
And quite divorce his memory from his part.
Princess of France. Therefore I do it; and I make no doubt2035
The rest will ne'er come in, if he be out
There's no such sport as sport by sport o'erthrown,
To make theirs ours and ours none but our own:
So shall we stay, mocking intended game,
And they, well mock'd, depart away with shame.2040
[Trumpets sound within]

Boyet. The trumpet sounds: be mask'd; the maskers come.
[The Ladies mask]
[Enter Blackamoors with music; MOTH; FERDINAND,]
BIRON, LONGAVILLE, and DUMAIN, in Russian habits,2045
and masked]
Moth. All hail, the richest beauties on the earth!—
Boyet. Beauties no richer than rich taffeta.
Moth. A holy parcel of the fairest dames.
[The Ladies turn their backs to him]2050
That ever turn'd their—backs—to mortal views!
Biron. [Aside to MOTH] Their eyes, villain, their eyes!
Moth. That ever turn'd their eyes to mortal views!—Out—
Boyet. True; out indeed.
Moth. Out of your favours, heavenly spirits, vouchsafe2055
Not to behold—
Biron. [Aside to MOTH] Once to behold, rogue.
Moth. Once to behold with your sun-beamed eyes,
—with your sun-beamed eyes—
Boyet. They will not answer to that epithet;2060
You were best call it 'daughter-beamed eyes.'
Moth. They do not mark me, and that brings me out.
Biron. Is this your perfectness? be gone, you rogue!
[Exit MOTH]

Rosaline. What would these strangers? know their minds, Boyet:2065
If they do speak our language, 'tis our will:
That some plain man recount their purposes
Know what they would.
Boyet. What would you with the princess?
Biron. Nothing but peace and gentle visitation.2070
Rosaline. What would they, say they?
Boyet. Nothing but peace and gentle visitation.
Rosaline. Why, that they have; and bid them so be gone.
Boyet. She says, you have it, and you may be gone.
Ferdinand. Say to her, we have measured many miles2075
To tread a measure with her on this grass.
Boyet. They say, that they have measured many a mile
To tread a measure with you on this grass.
Rosaline. It is not so. Ask them how many inches
Is in one mile: if they have measured many,2080
The measure then of one is easily told.
Boyet. If to come hither you have measured miles,
And many miles, the princess bids you tell
How many inches doth fill up one mile.
Biron. Tell her, we measure them by weary steps.2085
Boyet. She hears herself.
Rosaline. How many weary steps,
Of many weary miles you have o'ergone,
Are number'd in the travel of one mile?
Biron. We number nothing that we spend for you:2090
Our duty is so rich, so infinite,
That we may do it still without accompt.
Vouchsafe to show the sunshine of your face,
That we, like savages, may worship it.
Rosaline. My face is but a moon, and clouded too.2095
Ferdinand. Blessed are clouds, to do as such clouds do!
Vouchsafe, bright moon, and these thy stars, to shine,
Those clouds removed, upon our watery eyne.
Rosaline. O vain petitioner! beg a greater matter;
Thou now request'st but moonshine in the water.2100
Ferdinand. Then, in our measure do but vouchsafe one change.
Thou bid'st me beg: this begging is not strange.
Rosaline. Play, music, then! Nay, you must do it soon.
[Music plays]
Not yet! no dance! Thus change I like the moon.2105
Ferdinand. Will you not dance? How come you thus estranged?
Rosaline. You took the moon at full, but now she's changed.
Ferdinand. Yet still she is the moon, and I the man.
The music plays; vouchsafe some motion to it.
Rosaline. Our ears vouchsafe it.2110
Ferdinand. But your legs should do it.
Rosaline. Since you are strangers and come here by chance,
We'll not be nice: take hands. We will not dance.
Ferdinand. Why take we hands, then?
Rosaline. Only to part friends:2115
Curtsy, sweet hearts; and so the measure ends.
Ferdinand. More measure of this measure; be not nice.
Rosaline. We can afford no more at such a price.
Ferdinand. Prize you yourselves: what buys your company?
Rosaline. Your absence only.2120
Ferdinand. That can never be.
Rosaline. Then cannot we be bought: and so, adieu;
Twice to your visor, and half once to you.
Ferdinand. If you deny to dance, let's hold more chat.
Rosaline. In private, then.2125
Ferdinand. I am best pleased with that.
[They converse apart]

Biron. White-handed mistress, one sweet word with thee.
Princess of France. Honey, and milk, and sugar; there is three.
Biron. Nay then, two treys, and if you grow so nice,2130
Metheglin, wort, and malmsey: well run, dice!
There's half-a-dozen sweets.
Princess of France. Seventh sweet, adieu:
Since you can cog, I'll play no more with you.
Biron. One word in secret.2135
Princess of France. Let it not be sweet.
Biron. Thou grievest my gall.
Princess of France. Gall! bitter.
Biron. Therefore meet.
[They converse apart]

Dumain. Will you vouchsafe with me to change a word?
Maria. Name it.
Dumain. Fair lady,—
Maria. Say you so? Fair lord,—
Take that for your fair lady.2145
Dumain. Please it you,
As much in private, and I'll bid adieu.
[They converse apart]

Katharine. What, was your vizard made without a tongue?
Longaville. I know the reason, lady, why you ask.2150
Katharine. O for your reason! quickly, sir; I long.
Longaville. You have a double tongue within your mask,
And would afford my speechless vizard half.
Katharine. Veal, quoth the Dutchman. Is not 'veal' a calf?
Longaville. A calf, fair lady!2155
Katharine. No, a fair lord calf.
Longaville. Let's part the word.
Katharine. No, I'll not be your half
Take all, and wean it; it may prove an ox.
Longaville. Look, how you butt yourself in these sharp mocks!2160
Will you give horns, chaste lady? do not so.
Katharine. Then die a calf, before your horns do grow.
Longaville. One word in private with you, ere I die.
Katharine. Bleat softly then; the butcher hears you cry.
[They converse apart]

Boyet. The tongues of mocking wenches are as keen
As is the razor's edge invisible,
Cutting a smaller hair than may be seen,
Above the sense of sense; so sensible
Seemeth their conference; their conceits have wings2170
Fleeter than arrows, bullets, wind, thought, swifter things.
Rosaline. Not one word more, my maids; break off, break off.
Biron. By heaven, all dry-beaten with pure scoff!
Ferdinand. Farewell, mad wenches; you have simple wits.
Princess of France. Twenty adieus, my frozen Muscovits.2175
[Exeunt FERDINAND, Lords, and Blackamoors]
Are these the breed of wits so wonder'd at?
Boyet. Tapers they are, with your sweet breaths puff'd out.
Rosaline. Well-liking wits they have; gross, gross; fat, fat.
Princess of France. O poverty in wit, kingly-poor flout!2180
Will they not, think you, hang themselves tonight?
Or ever, but in vizards, show their faces?
This pert Biron was out of countenance quite.
Rosaline. O, they were all in lamentable cases!
The king was weeping-ripe for a good word.2185
Princess of France. Biron did swear himself out of all suit.
Maria. Dumain was at my service, and his sword:
No point, quoth I; my servant straight was mute.
Katharine. Lord Longaville said, I came o'er his heart;
And trow you what he called me?2190
Princess of France. Qualm, perhaps.
Katharine. Yes, in good faith.
Princess of France. Go, sickness as thou art!
Rosaline. Well, better wits have worn plain statute-caps.
But will you hear? the king is my love sworn.2195
Princess of France. And quick Biron hath plighted faith to me.
Katharine. And Longaville was for my service born.
Maria. Dumain is mine, as sure as bark on tree.
Boyet. Madam, and pretty mistresses, give ear:
Immediately they will again be here2200
In their own shapes; for it can never be
They will digest this harsh indignity.
Princess of France. Will they return?
Boyet. They will, they will, God knows,
And leap for joy, though they are lame with blows:2205
Therefore change favours; and, when they repair,
Blow like sweet roses in this summer air.
Princess of France. How blow? how blow? speak to be understood.
Boyet. Fair ladies mask'd are roses in their bud;
Dismask'd, their damask sweet commixture shown,2210
Are angels vailing clouds, or roses blown.
Princess of France. Avaunt, perplexity! What shall we do,
If they return in their own shapes to woo?
Rosaline. Good madam, if by me you'll be advised,
Let's, mock them still, as well known as disguised:2215
Let us complain to them what fools were here,
Disguised like Muscovites, in shapeless gear;
And wonder what they were and to what end
Their shallow shows and prologue vilely penn'd
And their rough carriage so ridiculous,2220
Should be presented at our tent to us.
Boyet. Ladies, withdraw: the gallants are at hand.
Princess of France. Whip to our tents, as roes run o'er land.
[Exeunt PRINCESS, ROSALINE, KATHARINE, and MARIA]
[Re-enter FERDINAND, BIRON, LONGAVILLE, and DUMAIN,]2225
in their proper habits]
Ferdinand. Fair sir, God save you! Where's the princess?
Boyet. Gone to her tent. Please it your majesty
Command me any service to her thither?
Ferdinand. That she vouchsafe me audience for one word.2230
Boyet. I will; and so will she, I know, my lord.
[Exit]

Biron. This fellow pecks up wit as pigeons pease,
And utters it again when God doth please:
He is wit's pedler, and retails his wares2235
At wakes and wassails, meetings, markets, fairs;
And we that sell by gross, the Lord doth know,
Have not the grace to grace it with such show.
This gallant pins the wenches on his sleeve;
Had he been Adam, he had tempted Eve;2240
A' can carve too, and lisp: why, this is he
That kiss'd his hand away in courtesy;
This is the ape of form, monsieur the nice,
That, when he plays at tables, chides the dice
In honourable terms: nay, he can sing2245
A mean most meanly; and in ushering
Mend him who can: the ladies call him sweet;
The stairs, as he treads on them, kiss his feet:
This is the flower that smiles on every one,
To show his teeth as white as whale's bone;2250
And consciences, that will not die in debt,
Pay him the due of honey-tongued Boyet.
Ferdinand. A blister on his sweet tongue, with my heart,
That put Armado's page out of his part!
Biron. See where it comes! Behavior, what wert thou2255
Till this madman show'd thee? and what art thou now?
[Re-enter the PRINCESS, ushered by BOYET, ROSALINE,]
MARIA, and KATHARINE]
Ferdinand. All hail, sweet madam, and fair time of day!
Princess of France. 'Fair' in 'all hail' is foul, as I conceive.2260
Ferdinand. Construe my speeches better, if you may.
Princess of France. Then wish me better; I will give you leave.
Ferdinand. We came to visit you, and purpose now
To lead you to our court; vouchsafe it then.
Princess of France. This field shall hold me; and so hold your vow:2265
Nor God, nor I, delights in perjured men.
Ferdinand. Rebuke me not for that which you provoke:
The virtue of your eye must break my oath.
Princess of France. You nickname virtue; vice you should have spoke;
For virtue's office never breaks men's troth.2270
Now by my maiden honour, yet as pure
As the unsullied lily, I protest,
A world of torments though I should endure,
I would not yield to be your house's guest;
So much I hate a breaking cause to be2275
Of heavenly oaths, vow'd with integrity.
Ferdinand. O, you have lived in desolation here,
Unseen, unvisited, much to our shame.
Princess of France. Not so, my lord; it is not so, I swear;
We have had pastimes here and pleasant game:2280
A mess of Russians left us but of late.
Ferdinand. How, madam! Russians!
Princess of France. Ay, in truth, my lord;
Trim gallants, full of courtship and of state.
Rosaline. Madam, speak true. It is not so, my lord:2285
My lady, to the manner of the days,
In courtesy gives undeserving praise.
We four indeed confronted were with four
In Russian habit: here they stay'd an hour,
And talk'd apace; and in that hour, my lord,2290
They did not bless us with one happy word.
I dare not call them fools; but this I think,
When they are thirsty, fools would fain have drink.
Biron. This jest is dry to me. Fair gentle sweet,
Your wit makes wise things foolish: when we greet,2295
With eyes best seeing, heaven's fiery eye,
By light we lose light: your capacity
Is of that nature that to your huge store
Wise things seem foolish and rich things but poor.
Rosaline. This proves you wise and rich, for in my eye,—2300
Biron. I am a fool, and full of poverty.
Rosaline. But that you take what doth to you belong,
It were a fault to snatch words from my tongue.
Biron. O, I am yours, and all that I possess!
Rosaline. All the fool mine?2305
Biron. I cannot give you less.
Rosaline. Which of the vizards was it that you wore?
Biron. Where? when? what vizard? why demand you this?
Rosaline. There, then, that vizard; that superfluous case
That hid the worse and show'd the better face.2310
Ferdinand. We are descried; they'll mock us now downright.
Dumain. Let us confess and turn it to a jest.
Princess of France. Amazed, my lord? why looks your highness sad?
Rosaline. Help, hold his brows! he'll swoon! Why look you pale?
Sea-sick, I think, coming from Muscovy.2315
Biron. Thus pour the stars down plagues for perjury.
Can any face of brass hold longer out?
Here stand I. lady, dart thy skill at me;
Bruise me with scorn, confound me with a flout;
Thrust thy sharp wit quite through my ignorance;2320
Cut me to pieces with thy keen conceit;
And I will wish thee never more to dance,
Nor never more in Russian habit wait.
O, never will I trust to speeches penn'd,
Nor to the motion of a schoolboy's tongue,2325
Nor never come in vizard to my friend,
Nor woo in rhyme, like a blind harper's song!
Taffeta phrases, silken terms precise,
Three-piled hyperboles, spruce affectation,
Figures pedantical; these summer-flies2330
Have blown me full of maggot ostentation:
I do forswear them; and I here protest,
By this white glove;—how white the hand, God knows!—
Henceforth my wooing mind shall be express'd
In russet yeas and honest kersey noes:2335
And, to begin, wench,—so God help me, la!—
My love to thee is sound, sans crack or flaw.
Rosaline. Sans sans, I pray you.
Biron. Yet I have a trick
Of the old rage: bear with me, I am sick;2340
I'll leave it by degrees. Soft, let us see:
Write, 'Lord have mercy on us' on those three;
They are infected; in their hearts it lies;
They have the plague, and caught it of your eyes;
These lords are visited; you are not free,2345
For the Lord's tokens on you do I see.
Princess of France. No, they are free that gave these tokens to us.
Biron. Our states are forfeit: seek not to undo us.
Rosaline. It is not so; for how can this be true,
That you stand forfeit, being those that sue?2350
Biron. Peace! for I will not have to do with you.
Rosaline. Nor shall not, if I do as I intend.
Biron. Speak for yourselves; my wit is at an end.
Ferdinand. Teach us, sweet madam, for our rude transgression
Some fair excuse.2355
Princess of France. The fairest is confession.
Were not you here but even now disguised?
Ferdinand. Madam, I was.
Princess of France. And were you well advised?
Ferdinand. I was, fair madam.2360
Princess of France. When you then were here,
What did you whisper in your lady's ear?
Ferdinand. That more than all the world I did respect her.
Princess of France. When she shall challenge this, you will reject her.
Ferdinand. Upon mine honour, no.2365
Princess of France. Peace, peace! forbear:
Your oath once broke, you force not to forswear.
Ferdinand. Despise me, when I break this oath of mine.
Princess of France. I will: and therefore keep it. Rosaline,
What did the Russian whisper in your ear?2370
Rosaline. Madam, he swore that he did hold me dear
As precious eyesight, and did value me
Above this world; adding thereto moreover
That he would wed me, or else die my lover.
Princess of France. God give thee joy of him! the noble lord2375
Most honourably doth unhold his word.
Ferdinand. What mean you, madam? by my life, my troth,
I never swore this lady such an oath.
Rosaline. By heaven, you did; and to confirm it plain,
You gave me this: but take it, sir, again.2380
Ferdinand. My faith and this the princess I did give:
I knew her by this jewel on her sleeve.
Princess of France. Pardon me, sir, this jewel did she wear;
And Lord Biron, I thank him, is my dear.
What, will you have me, or your pearl again?2385
Biron. Neither of either; I remit both twain.
I see the trick on't: here was a consent,
Knowing aforehand of our merriment,
To dash it like a Christmas comedy:
Some carry-tale, some please-man, some slight zany,2390
Some mumble-news, some trencher-knight, some Dick,
That smiles his cheek in years and knows the trick
To make my lady laugh when she's disposed,
Told our intents before; which once disclosed,
The ladies did change favours: and then we,2395
Following the signs, woo'd but the sign of she.
Now, to our perjury to add more terror,
We are again forsworn, in will and error.
Much upon this it is: and might not you
[To BOYET]2400
Forestall our sport, to make us thus untrue?
Do not you know my lady's foot by the squier,
And laugh upon the apple of her eye?
And stand between her back, sir, and the fire,
Holding a trencher, jesting merrily?2405
You put our page out: go, you are allow'd;
Die when you will, a smock shall be your shroud.
You leer upon me, do you? there's an eye
Wounds like a leaden sword.
Boyet. Full merrily2410
Hath this brave manage, this career, been run.
Biron. Lo, he is tilting straight! Peace! I have done.
[Enter COSTARD]
Welcome, pure wit! thou partest a fair fray.
Costard. O Lord, sir, they would know2415
Whether the three Worthies shall come in or no.
Biron. What, are there but three?
Costard. No, sir; but it is vara fine,
For every one pursents three.
Biron. And three times thrice is nine.2420
Costard. Not so, sir; under correction, sir; I hope it is not so.
You cannot beg us, sir, I can assure you, sir we know
what we know:
I hope, sir, three times thrice, sir,—
Biron. Is not nine.2425
Costard. Under correction, sir, we know whereuntil it doth amount.
Biron. By Jove, I always took three threes for nine.
Costard. O Lord, sir, it were pity you should get your living
by reckoning, sir.
Biron. How much is it?2430
Costard. O Lord, sir, the parties themselves, the actors,
sir, will show whereuntil it doth amount: for mine
own part, I am, as they say, but to parfect one man
in one poor man, Pompion the Great, sir.
Biron. Art thou one of the Worthies?2435
Costard. It pleased them to think me worthy of Pompion the
Great: for mine own part, I know not the degree of
the Worthy, but I am to stand for him.
Biron. Go, bid them prepare.
Costard. We will turn it finely off, sir; we will take2440
some care.
[Exit]

Ferdinand. Biron, they will shame us: let them not approach.
Biron. We are shame-proof, my lord: and tis some policy
To have one show worse than the king's and his company.2445
Ferdinand. I say they shall not come.
Princess of France. Nay, my good lord, let me o'errule you now:
That sport best pleases that doth least know how:
Where zeal strives to content, and the contents
Dies in the zeal of that which it presents:2450
Their form confounded makes most form in mirth,
When great things labouring perish in their birth.
Biron. A right description of our sport, my lord.
[Enter DON ADRIANO DE ARMADO]

Don Adriano de Armado. Anointed, I implore so much expense of thy royal2455
sweet breath as will utter a brace of words.
[Converses apart with FERDINAND, and delivers him a paper]

Princess of France. Doth this man serve God?
Biron. Why ask you?
Princess of France. He speaks not like a man of God's making.2460
Don Adriano de Armado. That is all one, my fair, sweet, honey monarch; for,
I protest, the schoolmaster is exceeding
fantastical; too, too vain, too too vain: but we
will put it, as they say, to fortuna de la guerra.
I wish you the peace of mind, most royal couplement!2465
[Exit]

Ferdinand. Here is like to be a good presence of Worthies. He
presents Hector of Troy; the swain, Pompey the
Great; the parish curate, Alexander; Armado's page,
Hercules; the pedant, Judas Maccabaeus: And if2470
these four Worthies in their first show thrive,
These four will change habits, and present the other five.
Biron. There is five in the first show.
Ferdinand. You are deceived; 'tis not so.
Biron. The pedant, the braggart, the hedge-priest, the fool2475
and the boy:—
Abate throw at novum, and the whole world again
Cannot pick out five such, take each one in his vein.
Ferdinand. The ship is under sail, and here she comes amain.
[Enter COSTARD, for Pompey]

Costard. I Pompey am,—
Boyet. You lie, you are not he.
Costard. I Pompey am,—
Boyet. With libbard's head on knee.
Biron. Well said, old mocker: I must needs be friends2485
with thee.
Costard. I Pompey am, Pompey surnamed the Big—
Dumain. The Great.
Costard. It is, 'Great,' sir:—
Pompey surnamed the Great;2490
That oft in field, with targe and shield, did make
my foe to sweat:
And travelling along this coast, I here am come by chance,
And lay my arms before the legs of this sweet lass of France,
If your ladyship would say, 'Thanks, Pompey,' I had done.2495
Princess of France. Great thanks, great Pompey.
Costard. 'Tis not so much worth; but I hope I was perfect: I
made a little fault in 'Great.'
Biron. My hat to a halfpenny, Pompey proves the best Worthy.
[Enter SIR NATHANIEL, for Alexander]

Sir Nathaniel. When in the world I lived, I was the world's
commander;
By east, west, north, and south, I spread my
conquering might:
My scutcheon plain declares that I am Alisander,—2505
Boyet. Your nose says, no, you are not for it stands too right.
Biron. Your nose smells 'no' in this, most tender-smelling knight.
Princess of France. The conqueror is dismay'd. Proceed, good Alexander.
Sir Nathaniel. When in the world I lived, I was the world's
commander,—2510
Boyet. Most true, 'tis right; you were so, Alisander.
Biron. Pompey the Great,—
Costard. Your servant, and Costard.
Biron. Take away the conqueror, take away Alisander.
Costard. [To SIR NATHANIEL] O, sir, you have overthrown2515
Alisander the conqueror! You will be scraped out of
the painted cloth for this: your lion, that holds
his poll-axe sitting on a close-stool, will be given
to Ajax: he will be the ninth Worthy. A conqueror,
and afeard to speak! run away for shame, Alisander.2520
[SIR NATHANIEL retires]
There, an't shall please you; a foolish mild man; an
honest man, look you, and soon dashed. He is a
marvellous good neighbour, faith, and a very good
bowler: but, for Alisander,—alas, you see how2525
'tis,—a little o'erparted. But there are Worthies
a-coming will speak their mind in some other sort.
[Enter HOLOFERNES, for Judas; and MOTH, for Hercules]

Holofernes. Great Hercules is presented by this imp,
Whose club kill'd Cerberus, that three-headed canis;2530
And when he was a babe, a child, a shrimp,
Thus did he strangle serpents in his manus.
Quoniam he seemeth in minority,
Ergo I come with this apology.
Keep some state in thy exit, and vanish.2535
[MOTH retires]
Judas I am,—
Dumain. A Judas!
Holofernes. Not Iscariot, sir.
Judas I am, ycliped Maccabaeus.2540
Dumain. Judas Maccabaeus clipt is plain Judas.
Biron. A kissing traitor. How art thou proved Judas?
Holofernes. Judas I am,—
Dumain. The more shame for you, Judas.
Holofernes. What mean you, sir?2545
Boyet. To make Judas hang himself.
Holofernes. Begin, sir; you are my elder.
Biron. Well followed: Judas was hanged on an elder.
Holofernes. I will not be put out of countenance.
Biron. Because thou hast no face.2550
Holofernes. What is this?
Boyet. A cittern-head.
Dumain. The head of a bodkin.
Biron. A Death's face in a ring.
Longaville. The face of an old Roman coin, scarce seen.2555
Boyet. The pommel of Caesar's falchion.
Dumain. The carved-bone face on a flask.
Biron. Saint George's half-cheek in a brooch.
Dumain. Ay, and in a brooch of lead.
Biron. Ay, and worn in the cap of a tooth-drawer.2560
And now forward; for we have put thee in countenance.
Holofernes. You have put me out of countenance.
Biron. False; we have given thee faces.
Holofernes. But you have out-faced them all.
Biron. An thou wert a lion, we would do so.2565
Boyet. Therefore, as he is an ass, let him go.
And so adieu, sweet Jude! nay, why dost thou stay?
Dumain. For the latter end of his name.
Biron. For the ass to the Jude; give it him:—Jud-as, away!
Holofernes. This is not generous, not gentle, not humble.2570
Boyet. A light for Monsieur Judas! it grows dark, he may stumble.
[HOLOFERNES retires]

Princess of France. Alas, poor Maccabaeus, how hath he been baited!
[Enter DON ADRIANO DE ARMADO, for Hector]

Biron. Hide thy head, Achilles: here comes Hector in arms.2575
Dumain. Though my mocks come home by me, I will now be merry.
Ferdinand. Hector was but a Troyan in respect of this.
Boyet. But is this Hector?
Ferdinand. I think Hector was not so clean-timbered.
Longaville. His leg is too big for Hector's.2580
Dumain. More calf, certain.
Boyet. No; he is best endued in the small.
Biron. This cannot be Hector.
Dumain. He's a god or a painter; for he makes faces.
Don Adriano de Armado. The armipotent Mars, of lances the almighty,2585
Gave Hector a gift,—
Dumain. A gilt nutmeg.
Biron. A lemon.
Longaville. Stuck with cloves.
Dumain. No, cloven.2590
Don Adriano de Armado. Peace!—
The armipotent Mars, of lances the almighty
Gave Hector a gift, the heir of Ilion;
A man so breathed, that certain he would fight; yea
From morn till night, out of his pavilion.2595
I am that flower,—
Dumain. That mint.
Longaville. That columbine.
Don Adriano de Armado. Sweet Lord Longaville, rein thy tongue.
Longaville. I must rather give it the rein, for it runs against Hector.2600
Dumain. Ay, and Hector's a greyhound.
Don Adriano de Armado. The sweet war-man is dead and rotten; sweet chucks,
beat not the bones of the buried: when he breathed,
he was a man. But I will forward with my device.
[To the PRINCESS]2605
Sweet royalty, bestow on me the sense of hearing.
Princess of France. Speak, brave Hector: we are much delighted.
Don Adriano de Armado. I do adore thy sweet grace's slipper.
Boyet. [Aside to DUMAIN] Loves her by the foot,—
Dumain. [Aside to BOYET] He may not by the yard.2610
Don Adriano de Armado. This Hector far surmounted Hannibal,—
Costard. The party is gone, fellow Hector, she is gone; she
is two months on her way.
Don Adriano de Armado. What meanest thou?
Costard. Faith, unless you play the honest Troyan, the poor2615
wench is cast away: she's quick; the child brags in
her belly already: tis yours.
Don Adriano de Armado. Dost thou infamonize me among potentates? thou shalt
die.
Costard. Then shall Hector be whipped for Jaquenetta that is2620
quick by him and hanged for Pompey that is dead by
him.
Dumain. Most rare Pompey!
Boyet. Renowned Pompey!
Biron. Greater than great, great, great, great Pompey!2625
Pompey the Huge!
Dumain. Hector trembles.
Biron. Pompey is moved. More Ates, more Ates! stir them
on! stir them on!
Dumain. Hector will challenge him.2630
Biron. Ay, if a' have no man's blood in's belly than will
sup a flea.
Don Adriano de Armado. By the north pole, I do challenge thee.
Costard. I will not fight with a pole, like a northern man:
I'll slash; I'll do it by the sword. I bepray you,2635
let me borrow my arms again.
Dumain. Room for the incensed Worthies!
Costard. I'll do it in my shirt.
Dumain. Most resolute Pompey!
Moth. Master, let me take you a buttonhole lower. Do you2640
not see Pompey is uncasing for the combat? What mean
you? You will lose your reputation.
Don Adriano de Armado. Gentlemen and soldiers, pardon me; I will not combat
in my shirt.
Dumain. You may not deny it: Pompey hath made the challenge.2645
Don Adriano de Armado. Sweet bloods, I both may and will.
Biron. What reason have you for't?
Don Adriano de Armado. The naked truth of it is, I have no shirt; I go
woolward for penance.
Boyet. True, and it was enjoined him in Rome for want of2650
linen: since when, I'll be sworn, he wore none but
a dishclout of Jaquenetta's, and that a' wears next
his heart for a favour.
[Enter MERCADE]

Mercade. God save you, madam!2655
Princess of France. Welcome, Mercade;
But that thou interrupt'st our merriment.
Mercade. I am sorry, madam; for the news I bring
Is heavy in my tongue. The king your father—
Princess of France. Dead, for my life!2660
Mercade. Even so; my tale is told.
Biron. Worthies, away! the scene begins to cloud.
Don Adriano de Armado. For mine own part, I breathe free breath. I have
seen the day of wrong through the little hole of
discretion, and I will right myself like a soldier.2665
[Exeunt Worthies]

Ferdinand. How fares your majesty?
Princess of France. Boyet, prepare; I will away tonight.
Ferdinand. Madam, not so; I do beseech you, stay.
Princess of France. Prepare, I say. I thank you, gracious lords,2670
For all your fair endeavors; and entreat,
Out of a new-sad soul, that you vouchsafe
In your rich wisdom to excuse or hide
The liberal opposition of our spirits,
If over-boldly we have borne ourselves2675
In the converse of breath: your gentleness
Was guilty of it. Farewell worthy lord!
A heavy heart bears not a nimble tongue:
Excuse me so, coming too short of thanks
For my great suit so easily obtain'd.2680
Ferdinand. The extreme parts of time extremely forms
All causes to the purpose of his speed,
And often at his very loose decides
That which long process could not arbitrate:
And though the mourning brow of progeny2685
Forbid the smiling courtesy of love
The holy suit which fain it would convince,
Yet, since love's argument was first on foot,
Let not the cloud of sorrow justle it
From what it purposed; since, to wail friends lost2690
Is not by much so wholesome-profitable
As to rejoice at friends but newly found.PRINCESS. I understand you not: my griefs are double.
Biron. Honest plain words best pierce the ear of grief;
And by these badges understand the king.
For your fair sakes have we neglected time,2695
Play'd foul play with our oaths: your beauty, ladies,
Hath much deform'd us, fashioning our humours
Even to the opposed end of our intents:
And what in us hath seem'd ridiculous,—
As love is full of unbefitting strains,2700
All wanton as a child, skipping and vain,
Form'd by the eye and therefore, like the eye,
Full of strange shapes, of habits and of forms,
Varying in subjects as the eye doth roll
To every varied object in his glance:2705
Which parti-coated presence of loose love
Put on by us, if, in your heavenly eyes,
Have misbecomed our oaths and gravities,
Those heavenly eyes, that look into these faults,
Suggested us to make. Therefore, ladies,2710
Our love being yours, the error that love makes
Is likewise yours: we to ourselves prove false,
By being once false for ever to be true
To those that make us both,—fair ladies, you:
And even that falsehood, in itself a sin,2715
Thus purifies itself and turns to grace.
Princess of France. We have received your letters full of love;
Your favours, the ambassadors of love;
And, in our maiden council, rated them
At courtship, pleasant jest and courtesy,2720
As bombast and as lining to the time:
But more devout than this in our respects
Have we not been; and therefore met your loves
In their own fashion, like a merriment.
Dumain. Our letters, madam, show'd much more than jest.2725
Longaville. So did our looks.
Rosaline. We did not quote them so.
Ferdinand. Now, at the latest minute of the hour,
Grant us your loves.
Princess of France. A time, methinks, too short2730
To make a world-without-end bargain in.
No, no, my lord, your grace is perjured much,
Full of dear guiltiness; and therefore this:
If for my love, as there is no such cause,
You will do aught, this shall you do for me:2735
Your oath I will not trust; but go with speed
To some forlorn and naked hermitage,
Remote from all the pleasures of the world;
There stay until the twelve celestial signs
Have brought about the annual reckoning.2740
If this austere insociable life
Change not your offer made in heat of blood;
If frosts and fasts, hard lodging and thin weeds
Nip not the gaudy blossoms of your love,
But that it bear this trial and last love;2745
Then, at the expiration of the year,
Come challenge me, challenge me by these deserts,
And, by this virgin palm now kissing thine
I will be thine; and till that instant shut
My woeful self up in a mourning house,2750
Raining the tears of lamentation
For the remembrance of my father's death.
If this thou do deny, let our hands part,
Neither entitled in the other's heart.
Ferdinand. If this, or more than this, I would deny,2755
To flatter up these powers of mine with rest,
The sudden hand of death close up mine eye!
Hence ever then my heart is in thy breast.
Biron. [And what to me, my love? and what to me?
Rosaline. You must be purged too, your sins are rack'd,2760
You are attaint with faults and perjury:
Therefore if you my favour mean to get,
A twelvemonth shall you spend, and never rest,
But seek the weary beds of people sick]
Dumain. But what to me, my love? but what to me? A wife?2765
Katharine. A beard, fair health, and honesty;
With three-fold love I wish you all these three.
Dumain. O, shall I say, I thank you, gentle wife?
Katharine. Not so, my lord; a twelvemonth and a day
I'll mark no words that smooth-faced wooers say:2770
Come when the king doth to my lady come;
Then, if I have much love, I'll give you some.
Dumain. I'll serve thee true and faithfully till then.
Katharine. Yet swear not, lest ye be forsworn again.
Longaville. What says Maria?2775
Maria. At the twelvemonth's end
I'll change my black gown for a faithful friend.
Longaville. I'll stay with patience; but the time is long.
Maria. The liker you; few taller are so young.
Biron. Studies my lady? mistress, look on me;2780
Behold the window of my heart, mine eye,
What humble suit attends thy answer there:
Impose some service on me for thy love.
Rosaline. Oft have I heard of you, my Lord Biron,
Before I saw you; and the world's large tongue2785
Proclaims you for a man replete with mocks,
Full of comparisons and wounding flouts,
Which you on all estates will execute
That lie within the mercy of your wit.
To weed this wormwood from your fruitful brain,2790
And therewithal to win me, if you please,
Without the which I am not to be won,
You shall this twelvemonth term from day to day
Visit the speechless sick and still converse
With groaning wretches; and your task shall be,2795
With all the fierce endeavor of your wit
To enforce the pained impotent to smile.
Biron. To move wild laughter in the throat of death?
It cannot be; it is impossible:
Mirth cannot move a soul in agony.2800
Rosaline. Why, that's the way to choke a gibing spirit,
Whose influence is begot of that loose grace
Which shallow laughing hearers give to fools:
A jest's prosperity lies in the ear
Of him that hears it, never in the tongue2805
Of him that makes it: then, if sickly ears,
Deaf'd with the clamours of their own dear groans,
Will hear your idle scorns, continue then,
And I will have you and that fault withal;
But if they will not, throw away that spirit,2810
And I shall find you empty of that fault,
Right joyful of your reformation.
Biron. A twelvemonth! well; befall what will befall,
I'll jest a twelvemonth in an hospital.
Princess of France. [To FERDINAND] Ay, sweet my lord; and so I take my leave.2815
Ferdinand. No, madam; we will bring you on your way.
Biron. Our wooing doth not end like an old play;
Jack hath not Jill: these ladies' courtesy
Might well have made our sport a comedy.
Ferdinand. Come, sir, it wants a twelvemonth and a day,2820
And then 'twill end.
Biron. That's too long for a play.
[Re-enter DON ADRIANO DE ARMADO]

Don Adriano de Armado. Sweet majesty, vouchsafe me,—
Princess of France. Was not that Hector?2825
Dumain. The worthy knight of Troy.
Don Adriano de Armado. I will kiss thy royal finger, and take leave. I am
a votary; I have vowed to Jaquenetta to hold the
plough for her sweet love three years. But, most
esteemed greatness, will you hear the dialogue that2830
the two learned men have compiled in praise of the
owl and the cuckoo? It should have followed in the
end of our show.
Ferdinand. Call them forth quickly; we will do so.
Don Adriano de Armado. Holla! approach.2835
[Re-enter HOLOFERNES, SIR NATHANIEL, MOTH, COSTARD,]
and others]
This side is Hiems, Winter, this Ver, the Spring;
the one maintained by the owl, the other by the
cuckoo. Ver, begin.2840
[THE SONG]
SPRING.
When daisies pied and violets blue
And lady-smocks all silver-white
And cuckoo-buds of yellow hue2845
Do paint the meadows with delight,
The cuckoo then, on every tree,
Mocks married men; for thus sings he, . Cuckoo;
Cuckoo, cuckoo: O word of fear,
Unpleasing to a married ear!2850
When shepherds pipe on oaten straws
And merry larks are ploughmen's clocks,
When turtles tread, and rooks, and daws,
And maidens bleach their summer smocks
The cuckoo then, on every tree,2855
Mocks married men; for thus sings he, . Cuckoo;
Cuckoo, cuckoo: O word of fear,
Unpleasing to a married ear!
WINTER.
When icicles hang by the wall2860
And Dick the shepherd blows his nail
And Tom bears logs into the hall
And milk comes frozen home in pail,
When blood is nipp'd and ways be foul,
Then nightly sings the staring owl, . Tu-whit;2865
Tu-who, a merry note,
While greasy Joan doth keel the pot.
When all aloud the wind doth blow
And coughing drowns the parson's saw
And birds sit brooding in the snow2870
And Marian's nose looks red and raw,
When roasted crabs hiss in the bowl,
Then nightly sings the staring owl, . Tu-whit;
Tu-who, a merry note,
While greasy Joan doth keel the pot.2875
Don Adriano de Armado. The words of Mercury are harsh after the songs of
Apollo. You that way: we this way.
[Exeunt]


The Taming of the Shrew
Shakespeare homepage | Taming of the Shrew | Entire play
SCENE I. Before an alehouse on a heath.
Enter Hostess and SLY
SLY
I'll pheeze you, in faith.
Hostess
A pair of stocks, you rogue!
SLY
Ye are a baggage: the Slys are no rogues; look in
the chronicles; we came in with Richard Conqueror.
Therefore paucas pallabris; let the world slide: sessa!
Hostess
You will not pay for the glasses you have burst?
SLY
No, not a denier. Go by, Jeronimy: go to thy cold
bed, and warm thee.
Hostess
I know my remedy; I must go fetch the
third--borough.
Exit

SLY
Third, or fourth, or fifth borough, I'll answer him
by law: I'll not budge an inch, boy: let him come,
and kindly.
Falls asleep

Horns winded. Enter a Lord from hunting, with his train

Lord
Huntsman, I charge thee, tender well my hounds:
Brach Merriman, the poor cur is emboss'd;
And couple Clowder with the deep--mouth'd brach.
Saw'st thou not, boy, how Silver made it good
At the hedge-corner, in the coldest fault?
I would not lose the dog for twenty pound.
First Huntsman
Why, Belman is as good as he, my lord;
He cried upon it at the merest loss
And twice to-day pick'd out the dullest scent:
Trust me, I take him for the better dog.
Lord
Thou art a fool: if Echo were as fleet,
I would esteem him worth a dozen such.
But sup them well and look unto them all:
To-morrow I intend to hunt again.
First Huntsman
I will, my lord.
Lord
What's here? one dead, or drunk? See, doth he breathe?
Second Huntsman
He breathes, my lord. Were he not warm'd with ale,
This were a bed but cold to sleep so soundly.
Lord
O monstrous beast! how like a swine he lies!
Grim death, how foul and loathsome is thine image!
Sirs, I will practise on this drunken man.
What think you, if he were convey'd to bed,
Wrapp'd in sweet clothes, rings put upon his fingers,
A most delicious banquet by his bed,
And brave attendants near him when he wakes,
Would not the beggar then forget himself?
First Huntsman
Believe me, lord, I think he cannot choose.
Second Huntsman
It would seem strange unto him when he waked.
Lord
Even as a flattering dream or worthless fancy.
Then take him up and manage well the jest:
Carry him gently to my fairest chamber
And hang it round with all my wanton pictures:
Balm his foul head in warm distilled waters
And burn sweet wood to make the lodging sweet:
Procure me music ready when he wakes,
To make a dulcet and a heavenly sound;
And if he chance to speak, be ready straight
And with a low submissive reverence
Say 'What is it your honour will command?'
Let one attend him with a silver basin
Full of rose-water and bestrew'd with flowers,
Another bear the ewer, the third a diaper,
And say 'Will't please your lordship cool your hands?'
Some one be ready with a costly suit
And ask him what apparel he will wear;
Another tell him of his hounds and horse,
And that his lady mourns at his disease:
Persuade him that he hath been lunatic;
And when he says he is, say that he dreams,
For he is nothing but a mighty lord.
This do and do it kindly, gentle sirs:
It will be pastime passing excellent,
If it be husbanded with modesty.
First Huntsman
My lord, I warrant you we will play our part,
As he shall think by our true diligence
He is no less than what we say he is.
Lord
Take him up gently and to bed with him;
And each one to his office when he wakes.
Some bear out SLY. A trumpet sounds

Sirrah, go see what trumpet 'tis that sounds:
Exit Servingman

Belike, some noble gentleman that means,
Travelling some journey, to repose him here.
Re-enter Servingman

How now! who is it?
Servant
An't please your honour, players
That offer service to your lordship.
Lord
Bid them come near.
Enter Players

Now, fellows, you are welcome.
Players
We thank your honour.
Lord
Do you intend to stay with me tonight?
A Player
So please your lordship to accept our duty.
Lord
With all my heart. This fellow I remember,
Since once he play'd a farmer's eldest son:
'Twas where you woo'd the gentlewoman so well:
I have forgot your name; but, sure, that part
Was aptly fitted and naturally perform'd.
A Player
I think 'twas Soto that your honour means.
Lord
'Tis very true: thou didst it excellent.
Well, you are come to me in a happy time;
The rather for I have some sport in hand
Wherein your cunning can assist me much.
There is a lord will hear you play to-night:
But I am doubtful of your modesties;
Lest over-eyeing of his odd behavior,--
For yet his honour never heard a play--
You break into some merry passion
And so offend him; for I tell you, sirs,
If you should smile he grows impatient.
A Player
Fear not, my lord: we can contain ourselves,
Were he the veriest antic in the world.
Lord
Go, sirrah, take them to the buttery,
And give them friendly welcome every one:
Let them want nothing that my house affords.
Exit one with the Players

Sirrah, go you to Barthol'mew my page,
And see him dress'd in all suits like a lady:
That done, conduct him to the drunkard's chamber;
And call him 'madam,' do him obeisance.
Tell him from me, as he will win my love,
He bear himself with honourable action,
Such as he hath observed in noble ladies
Unto their lords, by them accomplished:
Such duty to the drunkard let him do
With soft low tongue and lowly courtesy,
And say 'What is't your honour will command,
Wherein your lady and your humble wife
May show her duty and make known her love?'
And then with kind embracements, tempting kisses,
And with declining head into his bosom,
Bid him shed tears, as being overjoy'd
To see her noble lord restored to health,
Who for this seven years hath esteem'd him
No better than a poor and loathsome beggar:
And if the boy have not a woman's gift
To rain a shower of commanded tears,
An onion will do well for such a shift,
Which in a napkin being close convey'd
Shall in despite enforce a watery eye.
See this dispatch'd with all the haste thou canst:
Anon I'll give thee more instructions.
Exit a Servingman

I know the boy will well usurp the grace,
Voice, gait and action of a gentlewoman:
I long to hear him call the drunkard husband,
And how my men will stay themselves from laughter
When they do homage to this simple peasant.
I'll in to counsel them; haply my presence
May well abate the over-merry spleen
Which otherwise would grow into extremes.
Exeunt

SCENE II. A bedchamber in the Lord's house.
Enter aloft SLY, with Attendants; some with apparel, others with basin and ewer and appurtenances; and Lord
SLY
For God's sake, a pot of small ale.
First Servant
Will't please your lordship drink a cup of sack?
Second Servant
Will't please your honour taste of these conserves?
Third Servant
What raiment will your honour wear to-day?
SLY
I am Christophero Sly; call not me 'honour' nor
'lordship:' I ne'er drank sack in my life; and if
you give me any conserves, give me conserves of
beef: ne'er ask me what raiment I'll wear; for I
have no more doublets than backs, no more stockings
than legs, nor no more shoes than feet; nay,
sometimes more feet than shoes, or such shoes as my
toes look through the over-leather.
Lord
Heaven cease this idle humour in your honour!
O, that a mighty man of such descent,
Of such possessions and so high esteem,
Should be infused with so foul a spirit!
SLY
What, would you make me mad? Am not I Christopher
Sly, old Sly's son of Burtonheath, by birth a
pedlar, by education a cardmaker, by transmutation a
bear-herd, and now by present profession a tinker?
Ask Marian Hacket, the fat ale-wife of Wincot, if
she know me not: if she say I am not fourteen pence
on the score for sheer ale, score me up for the
lyingest knave in Christendom. What! I am not
bestraught: here's--
Third Servant
O, this it is that makes your lady mourn!
Second Servant
O, this is it that makes your servants droop!
Lord
Hence comes it that your kindred shuns your house,
As beaten hence by your strange lunacy.
O noble lord, bethink thee of thy birth,
Call home thy ancient thoughts from banishment
And banish hence these abject lowly dreams.
Look how thy servants do attend on thee,
Each in his office ready at thy beck.
Wilt thou have music? hark! Apollo plays,
Music

And twenty caged nightingales do sing:
Or wilt thou sleep? we'll have thee to a couch
Softer and sweeter than the lustful bed
On purpose trimm'd up for Semiramis.
Say thou wilt walk; we will bestrew the ground:
Or wilt thou ride? thy horses shall be trapp'd,
Their harness studded all with gold and pearl.
Dost thou love hawking? thou hast hawks will soar
Above the morning lark or wilt thou hunt?
Thy hounds shall make the welkin answer them
And fetch shrill echoes from the hollow earth.
First Servant
Say thou wilt course; thy greyhounds are as swift
As breathed stags, ay, fleeter than the roe.
Second Servant
Dost thou love pictures? we will fetch thee straight
Adonis painted by a running brook,
And Cytherea all in sedges hid,
Which seem to move and wanton with her breath,
Even as the waving sedges play with wind.
Lord
We'll show thee Io as she was a maid,
And how she was beguiled and surprised,
As lively painted as the deed was done.
Third Servant
Or Daphne roaming through a thorny wood,
Scratching her legs that one shall swear she bleeds,
And at that sight shall sad Apollo weep,
So workmanly the blood and tears are drawn.
Lord
Thou art a lord, and nothing but a lord:
Thou hast a lady far more beautiful
Than any woman in this waning age.
First Servant
And till the tears that she hath shed for thee
Like envious floods o'er-run her lovely face,
She was the fairest creature in the world;
And yet she is inferior to none.
SLY
Am I a lord? and have I such a lady?
Or do I dream? or have I dream'd till now?
I do not sleep: I see, I hear, I speak;
I smell sweet savours and I feel soft things:
Upon my life, I am a lord indeed
And not a tinker nor Christophero Sly.
Well, bring our lady hither to our sight;
And once again, a pot o' the smallest ale.
Second Servant
Will't please your mightiness to wash your hands?
O, how we joy to see your wit restored!
O, that once more you knew but what you are!
These fifteen years you have been in a dream;
Or when you waked, so waked as if you slept.
SLY
These fifteen years! by my fay, a goodly nap.
But did I never speak of all that time?
First Servant
O, yes, my lord, but very idle words:
For though you lay here in this goodly chamber,
Yet would you say ye were beaten out of door;
And rail upon the hostess of the house;
And say you would present her at the leet,
Because she brought stone jugs and no seal'd quarts:
Sometimes you would call out for Cicely Hacket.
SLY
Ay, the woman's maid of the house.
Third Servant
Why, sir, you know no house nor no such maid,
Nor no such men as you have reckon'd up,
As Stephen Sly and did John Naps of Greece
And Peter Turph and Henry Pimpernell
And twenty more such names and men as these
Which never were nor no man ever saw.
SLY
Now Lord be thanked for my good amends!
ALL
Amen.
SLY
I thank thee: thou shalt not lose by it.
Enter the Page as a lady, with attendants

Page
How fares my noble lord?
SLY
Marry, I fare well for here is cheer enough.
Where is my wife?
Page
Here, noble lord: what is thy will with her?
SLY
Are you my wife and will not call me husband?
My men should call me 'lord:' I am your goodman.
Page
My husband and my lord, my lord and husband;
I am your wife in all obedience.
SLY
I know it well. What must I call her?
Lord
Madam.
SLY
Al'ce madam, or Joan madam?
Lord
'Madam,' and nothing else: so lords
call ladies.
SLY
Madam wife, they say that I have dream'd
And slept above some fifteen year or more.
Page
Ay, and the time seems thirty unto me,
Being all this time abandon'd from your bed.
SLY
'Tis much. Servants, leave me and her alone.
Madam, undress you and come now to bed.
Page
Thrice noble lord, let me entreat of you
To pardon me yet for a night or two,
Or, if not so, until the sun be set:
For your physicians have expressly charged,
In peril to incur your former malady,
That I should yet absent me from your bed:
I hope this reason stands for my excuse.
SLY
Ay, it stands so that I may hardly
tarry so long. But I would be loath to fall into
my dreams again: I will therefore tarry in
despite of the flesh and the blood.
Enter a Messenger

Messenger
Your honour's players, heating your amendment,
Are come to play a pleasant comedy;
For so your doctors hold it very meet,
Seeing too much sadness hath congeal'd your blood,
And melancholy is the nurse of frenzy:
Therefore they thought it good you hear a play
And frame your mind to mirth and merriment,
Which bars a thousand harms and lengthens life.
SLY
Marry, I will, let them play it. Is not a
comondy a Christmas gambold or a tumbling-trick?
Page
No, my good lord; it is more pleasing stuff.
SLY
What, household stuff?
Page
It is a kind of history.
SLY
Well, well see't. Come, madam wife, sit by my side
and let the world slip: we shall ne'er be younger.
Flourish

ACT I
SCENE I. Padua. A public place.
Enter LUCENTIO and his man TRANIO
LUCENTIO
Tranio, since for the great desire I had
To see fair Padua, nursery of arts,
I am arrived for fruitful Lombardy,
The pleasant garden of great Italy;
And by my father's love and leave am arm'd
With his good will and thy good company,
My trusty servant, well approved in all,
Here let us breathe and haply institute
A course of learning and ingenious studies.
Pisa renown'd for grave citizens
Gave me my being and my father first,
A merchant of great traffic through the world,
Vincetino come of Bentivolii.
Vincetino's son brought up in Florence
It shall become to serve all hopes conceived,
To deck his fortune with his virtuous deeds:
And therefore, Tranio, for the time I study,
Virtue and that part of philosophy
Will I apply that treats of happiness
By virtue specially to be achieved.
Tell me thy mind; for I have Pisa left
And am to Padua come, as he that leaves
A shallow plash to plunge him in the deep
And with satiety seeks to quench his thirst.
TRANIO
Mi perdonato, gentle master mine,
I am in all affected as yourself;
Glad that you thus continue your resolve
To suck the sweets of sweet philosophy.
Only, good master, while we do admire
This virtue and this moral discipline,
Let's be no stoics nor no stocks, I pray;
Or so devote to Aristotle's cheques
As Ovid be an outcast quite abjured:
Balk logic with acquaintance that you have
And practise rhetoric in your common talk;
Music and poesy use to quicken you;
The mathematics and the metaphysics,
Fall to them as you find your stomach serves you;
No profit grows where is no pleasure ta'en:
In brief, sir, study what you most affect.
LUCENTIO
Gramercies, Tranio, well dost thou advise.
If, Biondello, thou wert come ashore,
We could at once put us in readiness,
And take a lodging fit to entertain
Such friends as time in Padua shall beget.
But stay a while: what company is this?
TRANIO
Master, some show to welcome us to town.
Enter BAPTISTA, KATHARINA, BIANCA, GREMIO, and HORTENSIO. LUCENTIO and TRANIO stand by

BAPTISTA
Gentlemen, importune me no farther,
For how I firmly am resolved you know;
That is, not bestow my youngest daughter
Before I have a husband for the elder:
If either of you both love Katharina,
Because I know you well and love you well,
Leave shall you have to court her at your pleasure.
GREMIO
[Aside] To cart her rather: she's too rough for me.
There, There, Hortensio, will you any wife?
KATHARINA
I pray you, sir, is it your will
To make a stale of me amongst these mates?
HORTENSIO
Mates, maid! how mean you that? no mates for you,
Unless you were of gentler, milder mould.
KATHARINA
I'faith, sir, you shall never need to fear:
I wis it is not half way to her heart;
But if it were, doubt not her care should be
To comb your noddle with a three-legg'd stool
And paint your face and use you like a fool.
HORTENSIA
From all such devils, good Lord deliver us!
GREMIO
And me too, good Lord!
TRANIO
Hush, master! here's some good pastime toward:
That wench is stark mad or wonderful froward.
LUCENTIO
But in the other's silence do I see
Maid's mild behavior and sobriety.
Peace, Tranio!
TRANIO
Well said, master; mum! and gaze your fill.
BAPTISTA
Gentlemen, that I may soon make good
What I have said, Bianca, get you in:
And let it not displease thee, good Bianca,
For I will love thee ne'er the less, my girl.
KATHARINA
A pretty peat! it is best
Put finger in the eye, an she knew why.
BIANCA
Sister, content you in my discontent.
Sir, to your pleasure humbly I subscribe:
My books and instruments shall be my company,
On them to took and practise by myself.
LUCENTIO
Hark, Tranio! thou may'st hear Minerva speak.
HORTENSIO
Signior Baptista, will you be so strange?
Sorry am I that our good will effects
Bianca's grief.
GREMIO
Why will you mew her up,
Signior Baptista, for this fiend of hell,
And make her bear the penance of her tongue?
BAPTISTA
Gentlemen, content ye; I am resolved:
Go in, Bianca:
Exit BIANCA

And for I know she taketh most delight
In music, instruments and poetry,
Schoolmasters will I keep within my house,
Fit to instruct her youth. If you, Hortensio,
Or Signior Gremio, you, know any such,
Prefer them hither; for to cunning men
I will be very kind, and liberal
To mine own children in good bringing up:
And so farewell. Katharina, you may stay;
For I have more to commune with Bianca.
Exit

KATHARINA
Why, and I trust I may go too, may I not? What,
shall I be appointed hours; as though, belike, I
knew not what to take and what to leave, ha?
Exit

GREMIO
You may go to the devil's dam: your gifts are so
good, here's none will hold you. Their love is not
so great, Hortensio, but we may blow our nails
together, and fast it fairly out: our cakes dough on
both sides. Farewell: yet for the love I bear my
sweet Bianca, if I can by any means light on a fit
man to teach her that wherein she delights, I will
wish him to her father.
HORTENSIO
So will I, Signior Gremio: but a word, I pray.
Though the nature of our quarrel yet never brooked
parle, know now, upon advice, it toucheth us both,
that we may yet again have access to our fair
mistress and be happy rivals in Bianco's love, to
labour and effect one thing specially.
GREMIO
What's that, I pray?
HORTENSIO
Marry, sir, to get a husband for her sister.
GREMIO
A husband! a devil.
HORTENSIO
I say, a husband.
GREMIO
I say, a devil. Thinkest thou, Hortensio, though
her father be very rich, any man is so very a fool
to be married to hell?
HORTENSIO
Tush, Gremio, though it pass your patience and mine
to endure her loud alarums, why, man, there be good
fellows in the world, an a man could light on them,
would take her with all faults, and money enough.
GREMIO
I cannot tell; but I had as lief take her dowry with
this condition, to be whipped at the high cross
every morning.
HORTENSIO
Faith, as you say, there's small choice in rotten
apples. But come; since this bar in law makes us
friends, it shall be so far forth friendly
maintained all by helping Baptista's eldest daughter
to a husband we set his youngest free for a husband,
and then have to't a fresh. Sweet Bianca! Happy man
be his dole! He that runs fastest gets the ring.
How say you, Signior Gremio?
GREMIO
I am agreed; and would I had given him the best
horse in Padua to begin his wooing that would
thoroughly woo her, wed her and bed her and rid the
house of her! Come on.
Exeunt GREMIO and HORTENSIO

TRANIO
I pray, sir, tell me, is it possible
That love should of a sudden take such hold?
LUCENTIO
O Tranio, till I found it to be true,
I never thought it possible or likely;
But see, while idly I stood looking on,
I found the effect of love in idleness:
And now in plainness do confess to thee,
That art to me as secret and as dear
As Anna to the queen of Carthage was,
Tranio, I burn, I pine, I perish, Tranio,
If I achieve not this young modest girl.
Counsel me, Tranio, for I know thou canst;
Assist me, Tranio, for I know thou wilt.
TRANIO
Master, it is no time to chide you now;
Affection is not rated from the heart:
If love have touch'd you, nought remains but so,
'Redime te captum quam queas minimo.'
LUCENTIO
Gramercies, lad, go forward; this contents:
The rest will comfort, for thy counsel's sound.
TRANIO
Master, you look'd so longly on the maid,
Perhaps you mark'd not what's the pith of all.
LUCENTIO
O yes, I saw sweet beauty in her face,
Such as the daughter of Agenor had,
That made great Jove to humble him to her hand.
When with his knees he kiss'd the Cretan strand.
TRANIO
Saw you no more? mark'd you not how her sister
Began to scold and raise up such a storm
That mortal ears might hardly endure the din?
LUCENTIO
Tranio, I saw her coral lips to move
And with her breath she did perfume the air:
Sacred and sweet was all I saw in her.
TRANIO
Nay, then, 'tis time to stir him from his trance.
I pray, awake, sir: if you love the maid,
Bend thoughts and wits to achieve her. Thus it stands:
Her eldest sister is so curst and shrewd
That till the father rid his hands of her,
Master, your love must live a maid at home;
And therefore has he closely mew'd her up,
Because she will not be annoy'd with suitors.
LUCENTIO
Ah, Tranio, what a cruel father's he!
But art thou not advised, he took some care
To get her cunning schoolmasters to instruct her?
TRANIO
Ay, marry, am I, sir; and now 'tis plotted.
LUCENTIO
I have it, Tranio.
TRANIO
Master, for my hand,
Both our inventions meet and jump in one.
LUCENTIO
Tell me thine first.
TRANIO
You will be schoolmaster
And undertake the teaching of the maid:
That's your device.
LUCENTIO
It is: may it be done?
TRANIO
Not possible; for who shall bear your part,
And be in Padua here Vincentio's son,
Keep house and ply his book, welcome his friends,
Visit his countrymen and banquet them?
LUCENTIO
Basta; content thee, for I have it full.
We have not yet been seen in any house,
Nor can we lie distinguish'd by our faces
For man or master; then it follows thus;
Thou shalt be master, Tranio, in my stead,
Keep house and port and servants as I should:
I will some other be, some Florentine,
Some Neapolitan, or meaner man of Pisa.
'Tis hatch'd and shall be so: Tranio, at once
Uncase thee; take my colour'd hat and cloak:
When Biondello comes, he waits on thee;
But I will charm him first to keep his tongue.
TRANIO
So had you need.
In brief, sir, sith it your pleasure is,
And I am tied to be obedient;
For so your father charged me at our parting,
'Be serviceable to my son,' quoth he,
Although I think 'twas in another sense;
I am content to be Lucentio,
Because so well I love Lucentio.
LUCENTIO
Tranio, be so, because Lucentio loves:
And let me be a slave, to achieve that maid
Whose sudden sight hath thrall'd my wounded eye.
Here comes the rogue.
Enter BIONDELLO

Sirrah, where have you been?
BIONDELLO
Where have I been! Nay, how now! where are you?
Master, has my fellow Tranio stolen your clothes? Or
you stolen his? or both? pray, what's the news?
LUCENTIO
Sirrah, come hither: 'tis no time to jest,
And therefore frame your manners to the time.
Your fellow Tranio here, to save my life,
Puts my apparel and my countenance on,
And I for my escape have put on his;
For in a quarrel since I came ashore
I kill'd a man and fear I was descried:
Wait you on him, I charge you, as becomes,
While I make way from hence to save my life:
You understand me?
BIONDELLO
I, sir! ne'er a whit.
LUCENTIO
And not a jot of Tranio in your mouth:
Tranio is changed into Lucentio.
BIONDELLO
The better for him: would I were so too!
TRANIO
So could I, faith, boy, to have the next wish after,
That Lucentio indeed had Baptista's youngest daughter.
But, sirrah, not for my sake, but your master's, I advise
You use your manners discreetly in all kind of companies:
When I am alone, why, then I am Tranio;
But in all places else your master Lucentio.
LUCENTIO
Tranio, let's go: one thing more rests, that
thyself execute, to make one among these wooers: if
thou ask me why, sufficeth, my reasons are both good
and weighty.
Exeunt

The presenters above speak

First Servant
My lord, you nod; you do not mind the play.
SLY
Yes, by Saint Anne, do I. A good matter, surely:
comes there any more of it?
Page
My lord, 'tis but begun.
SLY
'Tis a very excellent piece of work, madam lady:
would 'twere done!
They sit and mark

SCENE II. Padua. Before HORTENSIO'S house.
Enter PETRUCHIO and his man GRUMIO
PETRUCHIO
Verona, for a while I take my leave,
To see my friends in Padua, but of all
My best beloved and approved friend,
Hortensio; and I trow this is his house.
Here, sirrah Grumio; knock, I say.
GRUMIO
Knock, sir! whom should I knock? is there man has
rebused your worship?
PETRUCHIO
Villain, I say, knock me here soundly.
GRUMIO
Knock you here, sir! why, sir, what am I, sir, that
I should knock you here, sir?
PETRUCHIO
Villain, I say, knock me at this gate
And rap me well, or I'll knock your knave's pate.
GRUMIO
My master is grown quarrelsome. I should knock
you first,
And then I know after who comes by the worst.
PETRUCHIO
Will it not be?
Faith, sirrah, an you'll not knock, I'll ring it;
I'll try how you can sol, fa, and sing it.
He wrings him by the ears

GRUMIO
Help, masters, help! my master is mad.
PETRUCHIO
Now, knock when I bid you, sirrah villain!
Enter HORTENSIO

HORTENSIO
How now! what's the matter? My old friend Grumio!
and my good friend Petruchio! How do you all at Verona?
PETRUCHIO
Signior Hortensio, come you to part the fray?
'Con tutto il cuore, ben trovato,' may I say.
HORTENSIO
'Alla nostra casa ben venuto, molto honorato signor
mio Petruchio.' Rise, Grumio, rise: we will compound
this quarrel.
GRUMIO
Nay, 'tis no matter, sir, what he 'leges in Latin.
if this be not a lawful case for me to leave his
service, look you, sir, he bid me knock him and rap
him soundly, sir: well, was it fit for a servant to
use his master so, being perhaps, for aught I see,
two and thirty, a pip out? Whom would to God I had
well knock'd at first, Then had not Grumio come by the worst.
PETRUCHIO
A senseless villain! Good Hortensio,
I bade the rascal knock upon your gate
And could not get him for my heart to do it.
GRUMIO
Knock at the gate! O heavens! Spake you not these
words plain, 'Sirrah, knock me here, rap me here,
knock me well, and knock me soundly'? And come you
now with, 'knocking at the gate'?
PETRUCHIO
Sirrah, be gone, or talk not, I advise you.
HORTENSIO
Petruchio, patience; I am Grumio's pledge:
Why, this's a heavy chance 'twixt him and you,
Your ancient, trusty, pleasant servant Grumio.
And tell me now, sweet friend, what happy gale
Blows you to Padua here from old Verona?
PETRUCHIO
Such wind as scatters young men through the world,
To seek their fortunes farther than at home
Where small experience grows. But in a few,
Signior Hortensio, thus it stands with me:
Antonio, my father, is deceased;
And I have thrust myself into this maze,
Haply to wive and thrive as best I may:
Crowns in my purse I have and goods at home,
And so am come abroad to see the world.
HORTENSIO
Petruchio, shall I then come roundly to thee
And wish thee to a shrewd ill-favour'd wife?
Thou'ldst thank me but a little for my counsel:
And yet I'll promise thee she shall be rich
And very rich: but thou'rt too much my friend,
And I'll not wish thee to her.
PETRUCHIO
Signior Hortensio, 'twixt such friends as we
Few words suffice; and therefore, if thou know
One rich enough to be Petruchio's wife,
As wealth is burden of my wooing dance,
Be she as foul as was Florentius' love,
As old as Sibyl and as curst and shrewd
As Socrates' Xanthippe, or a worse,
She moves me not, or not removes, at least,
Affection's edge in me, were she as rough
As are the swelling Adriatic seas:
I come to wive it wealthily in Padua;
If wealthily, then happily in Padua.
GRUMIO
Nay, look you, sir, he tells you flatly what his
mind is: Why give him gold enough and marry him to
a puppet or an aglet-baby; or an old trot with ne'er
a tooth in her head, though she have as many diseases
as two and fifty horses: why, nothing comes amiss,
so money comes withal.
HORTENSIO
Petruchio, since we are stepp'd thus far in,
I will continue that I broach'd in jest.
I can, Petruchio, help thee to a wife
With wealth enough and young and beauteous,
Brought up as best becomes a gentlewoman:
Her only fault, and that is faults enough,
Is that she is intolerable curst
And shrewd and froward, so beyond all measure
That, were my state far worser than it is,
I would not wed her for a mine of gold.
PETRUCHIO
Hortensio, peace! thou know'st not gold's effect:
Tell me her father's name and 'tis enough;
For I will board her, though she chide as loud
As thunder when the clouds in autumn crack.
HORTENSIO
Her father is Baptista Minola,
An affable and courteous gentleman:
Her name is Katharina Minola,
Renown'd in Padua for her scolding tongue.
PETRUCHIO
I know her father, though I know not her;
And he knew my deceased father well.
I will not sleep, Hortensio, till I see her;
And therefore let me be thus bold with you
To give you over at this first encounter,
Unless you will accompany me thither.
GRUMIO
I pray you, sir, let him go while the humour lasts.
O' my word, an she knew him as well as I do, she
would think scolding would do little good upon him:
she may perhaps call him half a score knaves or so:
why, that's nothing; an he begin once, he'll rail in
his rope-tricks. I'll tell you what sir, an she
stand him but a little, he will throw a figure in
her face and so disfigure her with it that she
shall have no more eyes to see withal than a cat.
You know him not, sir.
HORTENSIO
Tarry, Petruchio, I must go with thee,
For in Baptista's keep my treasure is:
He hath the jewel of my life in hold,
His youngest daughter, beautiful Binaca,
And her withholds from me and other more,
Suitors to her and rivals in my love,
Supposing it a thing impossible,
For those defects I have before rehearsed,
That ever Katharina will be woo'd;
Therefore this order hath Baptista ta'en,
That none shall have access unto Bianca
Till Katharina the curst have got a husband.
GRUMIO
Katharina the curst!
A title for a maid of all titles the worst.
HORTENSIO
Now shall my friend Petruchio do me grace,
And offer me disguised in sober robes
To old Baptista as a schoolmaster
Well seen in music, to instruct Bianca;
That so I may, by this device, at least
Have leave and leisure to make love to her
And unsuspected court her by herself.
GRUMIO
Here's no knavery! See, to beguile the old folks,
how the young folks lay their heads together!
Enter GREMIO, and LUCENTIO disguised

Master, master, look about you: who goes there, ha?
HORTENSIO
Peace, Grumio! it is the rival of my love.
Petruchio, stand by a while.
GRUMIO
A proper stripling and an amorous!
GREMIO
O, very well; I have perused the note.
Hark you, sir: I'll have them very fairly bound:
All books of love, see that at any hand;
And see you read no other lectures to her:
You understand me: over and beside
Signior Baptista's liberality,
I'll mend it with a largess. Take your paper too,
And let me have them very well perfumed
For she is sweeter than perfume itself
To whom they go to. What will you read to her?
LUCENTIO
Whate'er I read to her, I'll plead for you
As for my patron, stand you so assured,
As firmly as yourself were still in place:
Yea, and perhaps with more successful words
Than you, unless you were a scholar, sir.
GREMIO
O this learning, what a thing it is!
GRUMIO
O this woodcock, what an ass it is!
PETRUCHIO
Peace, sirrah!
HORTENSIO
Grumio, mum! God save you, Signior Gremio.
GREMIO
And you are well met, Signior Hortensio.
Trow you whither I am going? To Baptista Minola.
I promised to inquire carefully
About a schoolmaster for the fair Bianca:
And by good fortune I have lighted well
On this young man, for learning and behavior
Fit for her turn, well read in poetry
And other books, good ones, I warrant ye.
HORTENSIO
'Tis well; and I have met a gentleman
Hath promised me to help me to another,
A fine musician to instruct our mistress;
So shall I no whit be behind in duty
To fair Bianca, so beloved of me.
GREMIO
Beloved of me; and that my deeds shall prove.
GRUMIO
And that his bags shall prove.
HORTENSIO
Gremio, 'tis now no time to vent our love:
Listen to me, and if you speak me fair,
I'll tell you news indifferent good for either.
Here is a gentleman whom by chance I met,
Upon agreement from us to his liking,
Will undertake to woo curst Katharina,
Yea, and to marry her, if her dowry please.
GREMIO
So said, so done, is well.
Hortensio, have you told him all her faults?
PETRUCHIO
I know she is an irksome brawling scold:
If that be all, masters, I hear no harm.
GREMIO
No, say'st me so, friend? What countryman?
PETRUCHIO
Born in Verona, old Antonio's son:
My father dead, my fortune lives for me;
And I do hope good days and long to see.
GREMIO
O sir, such a life, with such a wife, were strange!
But if you have a stomach, to't i' God's name:
You shall have me assisting you in all.
But will you woo this wild-cat?
PETRUCHIO
Will I live?
GRUMIO
Will he woo her? ay, or I'll hang her.
PETRUCHIO
Why came I hither but to that intent?
Think you a little din can daunt mine ears?
Have I not in my time heard lions roar?
Have I not heard the sea puff'd up with winds
Rage like an angry boar chafed with sweat?
Have I not heard great ordnance in the field,
And heaven's artillery thunder in the skies?
Have I not in a pitched battle heard
Loud 'larums, neighing steeds, and trumpets' clang?
And do you tell me of a woman's tongue,
That gives not half so great a blow to hear
As will a chestnut in a farmer's fire?
Tush, tush! fear boys with bugs.
GRUMIO
For he fears none.
GREMIO
Hortensio, hark:
This gentleman is happily arrived,
My mind presumes, for his own good and ours.
HORTENSIO
I promised we would be contributors
And bear his charging of wooing, whatsoe'er.
GREMIO
And so we will, provided that he win her.
GRUMIO
I would I were as sure of a good dinner.
Enter TRANIO brave, and BIONDELLO

TRANIO
Gentlemen, God save you. If I may be bold,
Tell me, I beseech you, which is the readiest way
To the house of Signior Baptista Minola?
BIONDELLO
He that has the two fair daughters: is't he you mean?
TRANIO
Even he, Biondello.
GREMIO
Hark you, sir; you mean not her to--
TRANIO
Perhaps, him and her, sir: what have you to do?
PETRUCHIO
Not her that chides, sir, at any hand, I pray.
TRANIO
I love no chiders, sir. Biondello, let's away.
LUCENTIO
Well begun, Tranio.
HORTENSIO
Sir, a word ere you go;
Are you a suitor to the maid you talk of, yea or no?
TRANIO
And if I be, sir, is it any offence?
GREMIO
No; if without more words you will get you hence.
TRANIO
Why, sir, I pray, are not the streets as free
For me as for you?
GREMIO
But so is not she.
TRANIO
For what reason, I beseech you?
GREMIO
For this reason, if you'll know,
That she's the choice love of Signior Gremio.
HORTENSIO
That she's the chosen of Signior Hortensio.
TRANIO
Softly, my masters! if you be gentlemen,
Do me this right; hear me with patience.
Baptista is a noble gentleman,
To whom my father is not all unknown;
And were his daughter fairer than she is,
She may more suitors have and me for one.
Fair Leda's daughter had a thousand wooers;
Then well one more may fair Bianca have:
And so she shall; Lucentio shall make one,
Though Paris came in hope to speed alone.
GREMIO
What! this gentleman will out-talk us all.
LUCENTIO
Sir, give him head: I know he'll prove a jade.
PETRUCHIO
Hortensio, to what end are all these words?
HORTENSIO
Sir, let me be so bold as ask you,
Did you yet ever see Baptista's daughter?
TRANIO
No, sir; but hear I do that he hath two,
The one as famous for a scolding tongue
As is the other for beauteous modesty.
PETRUCHIO
Sir, sir, the first's for me; let her go by.
GREMIO
Yea, leave that labour to great Hercules;
And let it be more than Alcides' twelve.
PETRUCHIO
Sir, understand you this of me in sooth:
The younges t daughter whom you hearken for
Her father keeps from all access of suitors,
And will not promise her to any man
Until the elder sister first be wed:
The younger then is free and not before.
TRANIO
If it be so, sir, that you are the man
Must stead us all and me amongst the rest,
And if you break the ice and do this feat,
Achieve the elder, set the younger free
For our access, whose hap shall be to have her
Will not so graceless be to be ingrate.
HORTENSIO
Sir, you say well and well you do conceive;
And since you do profess to be a suitor,
You must, as we do, gratify this gentleman,
To whom we all rest generally beholding.
TRANIO
Sir, I shall not be slack: in sign whereof,
Please ye we may contrive this afternoon,
And quaff carouses to our mistress' health,
And do as adversaries do in law,
Strive mightily, but eat and drink as friends.
GRUMIO BIONDELLO
O excellent motion! Fellows, let's be gone.
HORTENSIO
The motion's good indeed and be it so,
Petruchio, I shall be your ben venuto.
Exeunt

ACT II
SCENE I. Padua. A room in BAPTISTA'S house.
Enter KATHARINA and BIANCA
BIANCA
Good sister, wrong me not, nor wrong yourself,
To make a bondmaid and a slave of me;
That I disdain: but for these other gawds,
Unbind my hands, I'll pull them off myself,
Yea, all my raiment, to my petticoat;
Or what you will command me will I do,
So well I know my duty to my elders.
KATHARINA
Of all thy suitors, here I charge thee, tell
Whom thou lovest best: see thou dissemble not.
BIANCA
Believe me, sister, of all the men alive
I never yet beheld that special face
Which I could fancy more than any other.
KATHARINA
Minion, thou liest. Is't not Hortensio?
BIANCA
If you affect him, sister, here I swear
I'll plead for you myself, but you shall have
him.
KATHARINA
O then, belike, you fancy riches more:
You will have Gremio to keep you fair.
BIANCA
Is it for him you do envy me so?
Nay then you jest, and now I well perceive
You have but jested with me all this while:
I prithee, sister Kate, untie my hands.
KATHARINA
If that be jest, then all the rest was so.
Strikes her

Enter BAPTISTA

BAPTISTA
Why, how now, dame! whence grows this insolence?
Bianca, stand aside. Poor girl! she weeps.
Go ply thy needle; meddle not with her.
For shame, thou helding of a devilish spirit,
Why dost thou wrong her that did ne'er wrong thee?
When did she cross thee with a bitter word?
KATHARINA
Her silence flouts me, and I'll be revenged.
Flies after BIANCA

BAPTISTA
What, in my sight? Bianca, get thee in.
Exit BIANCA

KATHARINA
What, will you not suffer me? Nay, now I see
She is your treasure, she must have a husband;
I must dance bare-foot on her wedding day
And for your love to her lead apes in hell.
Talk not to me: I will go sit and weep
Till I can find occasion of revenge.
Exit

BAPTISTA
Was ever gentleman thus grieved as I?
But who comes here?
Enter GREMIO, LUCENTIO in the habit of a mean man; PETRUCHIO, with HORTENSIO as a musician; and TRANIO, with BIONDELLO bearing a lute and books

GREMIO
Good morrow, neighbour Baptista.
BAPTISTA
Good morrow, neighbour Gremio.
God save you, gentlemen!
PETRUCHIO
And you, good sir! Pray, have you not a daughter
Call'd Katharina, fair and virtuous?
BAPTISTA
I have a daughter, sir, called Katharina.
GREMIO
You are too blunt: go to it orderly.
PETRUCHIO
You wrong me, Signior Gremio: give me leave.
I am a gentleman of Verona, sir,
That, hearing of her beauty and her wit,
Her affability and bashful modesty,
Her wondrous qualities and mild behavior,
Am bold to show myself a forward guest
Within your house, to make mine eye the witness
Of that report which I so oft have heard.
And, for an entrance to my entertainment,
I do present you with a man of mine,
Presenting HORTENSIO

Cunning in music and the mathematics,
To instruct her fully in those sciences,
Whereof I know she is not ignorant:
Accept of him, or else you do me wrong:
His name is Licio, born in Mantua.
BAPTISTA
You're welcome, sir; and he, for your good sake.
But for my daughter Katharina, this I know,
She is not for your turn, the more my grief.
PETRUCHIO
I see you do not mean to part with her,
Or else you like not of my company.
BAPTISTA
Mistake me not; I speak but as I find.
Whence are you, sir? what may I call your name?
PETRUCHIO
Petruchio is my name; Antonio's son,
A man well known throughout all Italy.
BAPTISTA
I know him well: you are welcome for his sake.
GREMIO
Saving your tale, Petruchio, I pray,
Let us, that are poor petitioners, speak too:
Baccare! you are marvellous forward.
PETRUCHIO
O, pardon me, Signior Gremio; I would fain be doing.
GREMIO
I doubt it not, sir; but you will curse your
wooing. Neighbour, this is a gift very grateful, I am
sure of it. To express the like kindness, myself,
that have been more kindly beholding to you than
any, freely give unto you this young scholar,
Presenting LUCENTIO

that hath been long studying at Rheims; as cunning
in Greek, Latin, and other languages, as the other
in music and mathematics: his name is Cambio; pray,
accept his service.
BAPTISTA
A thousand thanks, Signior Gremio.
Welcome, good Cambio.
To TRANIO

But, gentle sir, methinks you walk like a stranger:
may I be so bold to know the cause of your coming?
TRANIO
Pardon me, sir, the boldness is mine own,
That, being a stranger in this city here,
Do make myself a suitor to your daughter,
Unto Bianca, fair and virtuous.
Nor is your firm resolve unknown to me,
In the preferment of the eldest sister.
This liberty is all that I request,
That, upon knowledge of my parentage,
I may have welcome 'mongst the rest that woo
And free access and favour as the rest:
And, toward the education of your daughters,
I here bestow a simple instrument,
And this small packet of Greek and Latin books:
If you accept them, then their worth is great.
BAPTISTA
Lucentio is your name; of whence, I pray?
TRANIO
Of Pisa, sir; son to Vincentio.
BAPTISTA
A mighty man of Pisa; by report
I know him well: you are very welcome, sir,
Take you the lute, and you the set of books;
You shall go see your pupils presently.
Holla, within!
Enter a Servant

Sirrah, lead these gentlemen
To my daughters; and tell them both,
These are their tutors: bid them use them well.
Exit Servant, with LUCENTIO and HORTENSIO, BIONDELLO following

We will go walk a little in the orchard,
And then to dinner. You are passing welcome,
And so I pray you all to think yourselves.
PETRUCHIO
Signior Baptista, my business asketh haste,
And every day I cannot come to woo.
You knew my father well, and in him me,
Left solely heir to all his lands and goods,
Which I have better'd rather than decreased:
Then tell me, if I get your daughter's love,
What dowry shall I have with her to wife?
BAPTISTA
After my death the one half of my lands,
And in possession twenty thousand crowns.
PETRUCHIO
And, for that dowry, I'll assure her of
Her widowhood, be it that she survive me,
In all my lands and leases whatsoever:
Let specialties be therefore drawn between us,
That covenants may be kept on either hand.
BAPTISTA
Ay, when the special thing is well obtain'd,
That is, her love; for that is all in all.
PETRUCHIO
Why, that is nothing: for I tell you, father,
I am as peremptory as she proud-minded;
And where two raging fires meet together
They do consume the thing that feeds their fury:
Though little fire grows great with little wind,
Yet extreme gusts will blow out fire and all:
So I to her and so she yields to me;
For I am rough and woo not like a babe.
BAPTISTA
Well mayst thou woo, and happy be thy speed!
But be thou arm'd for some unhappy words.
PETRUCHIO
Ay, to the proof; as mountains are for winds,
That shake not, though they blow perpetually.
Re-enter HORTENSIO, with his head broke

BAPTISTA
How now, my friend! why dost thou look so pale?
HORTENSIO
For fear, I promise you, if I look pale.
BAPTISTA
What, will my daughter prove a good musician?
HORTENSIO
I think she'll sooner prove a soldier
Iron may hold with her, but never lutes.
BAPTISTA
Why, then thou canst not break her to the lute?
HORTENSIO
Why, no; for she hath broke the lute to me.
I did but tell her she mistook her frets,
And bow'd her hand to teach her fingering;
When, with a most impatient devilish spirit,
'Frets, call you these?' quoth she; 'I'll fume
with them:'
And, with that word, she struck me on the head,
And through the instrument my pate made way;
And there I stood amazed for a while,
As on a pillory, looking through the lute;
While she did call me rascal fiddler
And twangling Jack; with twenty such vile terms,
As had she studied to misuse me so.
PETRUCHIO
Now, by the world, it is a lusty wench;
I love her ten times more than e'er I did:
O, how I long to have some chat with her!
BAPTISTA
Well, go with me and be not so discomfited:
Proceed in practise with my younger daughter;
She's apt to learn and thankful for good turns.
Signior Petruchio, will you go with us,
Or shall I send my daughter Kate to you?
PETRUCHIO
I pray you do.
Exeunt all but PETRUCHIO

I will attend her here,
And woo her with some spirit when she comes.
Say that she rail; why then I'll tell her plain
She sings as sweetly as a nightingale:
Say that she frown, I'll say she looks as clear
As morning roses newly wash'd with dew:
Say she be mute and will not speak a word;
Then I'll commend her volubility,
And say she uttereth piercing eloquence:
If she do bid me pack, I'll give her thanks,
As though she bid me stay by her a week:
If she deny to wed, I'll crave the day
When I shall ask the banns and when be married.
But here she comes; and now, Petruchio, speak.
Enter KATHARINA

Good morrow, Kate; for that's your name, I hear.
KATHARINA
Well have you heard, but something hard of hearing:
They call me Katharina that do talk of me.
PETRUCHIO
You lie, in faith; for you are call'd plain Kate,
And bonny Kate and sometimes Kate the curst;
But Kate, the prettiest Kate in Christendom
Kate of Kate Hall, my super-dainty Kate,
For dainties are all Kates, and therefore, Kate,
Take this of me, Kate of my consolation;
Hearing thy mildness praised in every town,
Thy virtues spoke of, and thy beauty sounded,
Yet not so deeply as to thee belongs,
Myself am moved to woo thee for my wife.
KATHARINA
Moved! in good time: let him that moved you hither
Remove you hence: I knew you at the first
You were a moveable.
PETRUCHIO
Why, what's a moveable?
KATHARINA
A join'd-stool.
PETRUCHIO
Thou hast hit it: come, sit on me.
KATHARINA
Asses are made to bear, and so are you.
PETRUCHIO
Women are made to bear, and so are you.
KATHARINA
No such jade as you, if me you mean.
PETRUCHIO
Alas! good Kate, I will not burden thee;
For, knowing thee to be but young and light--
KATHARINA
Too light for such a swain as you to catch;
And yet as heavy as my weight should be.
PETRUCHIO
Should be! should--buzz!
KATHARINA
Well ta'en, and like a buzzard.
PETRUCHIO
O slow-wing'd turtle! shall a buzzard take thee?
KATHARINA
Ay, for a turtle, as he takes a buzzard.
PETRUCHIO
Come, come, you wasp; i' faith, you are too angry.
KATHARINA
If I be waspish, best beware my sting.
PETRUCHIO
My remedy is then, to pluck it out.
KATHARINA
Ay, if the fool could find it where it lies,
PETRUCHIO
Who knows not where a wasp does
wear his sting? In his tail.
KATHARINA
In his tongue.
PETRUCHIO
Whose tongue?
KATHARINA
Yours, if you talk of tails: and so farewell.
PETRUCHIO
What, with my tongue in your tail? nay, come again,
Good Kate; I am a gentleman.
KATHARINA
That I'll try.
She strikes him

PETRUCHIO
I swear I'll cuff you, if you strike again.
KATHARINA
So may you lose your arms:
If you strike me, you are no gentleman;
And if no gentleman, why then no arms.
PETRUCHIO
A herald, Kate? O, put me in thy books!
KATHARINA
What is your crest? a coxcomb?
PETRUCHIO
A combless cock, so Kate will be my hen.
KATHARINA
No cock of mine; you crow too like a craven.
PETRUCHIO
Nay, come, Kate, come; you must not look so sour.
KATHARINA
It is my fashion, when I see a crab.
PETRUCHIO
Why, here's no crab; and therefore look not sour.
KATHARINA
There is, there is.
PETRUCHIO
Then show it me.
KATHARINA
Had I a glass, I would.
PETRUCHIO
What, you mean my face?
KATHARINA
Well aim'd of such a young one.
PETRUCHIO
Now, by Saint George, I am too young for you.
KATHARINA
Yet you are wither'd.
PETRUCHIO
'Tis with cares.
KATHARINA
I care not.
PETRUCHIO
Nay, hear you, Kate: in sooth you scape not so.
KATHARINA
I chafe you, if I tarry: let me go.
PETRUCHIO
No, not a whit: I find you passing gentle.
'Twas told me you were rough and coy and sullen,
And now I find report a very liar;
For thou are pleasant, gamesome, passing courteous,
But slow in speech, yet sweet as spring-time flowers:
Thou canst not frown, thou canst not look askance,
Nor bite the lip, as angry wenches will,
Nor hast thou pleasure to be cross in talk,
But thou with mildness entertain'st thy wooers,
With gentle conference, soft and affable.
Why does the world report that Kate doth limp?
O slanderous world! Kate like the hazel-twig
Is straight and slender and as brown in hue
As hazel nuts and sweeter than the kernels.
O, let me see thee walk: thou dost not halt.
KATHARINA
Go, fool, and whom thou keep'st command.
PETRUCHIO
Did ever Dian so become a grove
As Kate this chamber with her princely gait?
O, be thou Dian, and let her be Kate;
And then let Kate be chaste and Dian sportful!
KATHARINA
Where did you study all this goodly speech?
PETRUCHIO
It is extempore, from my mother-wit.
KATHARINA
A witty mother! witless else her son.
PETRUCHIO
Am I not wise?
KATHARINA
Yes; keep you warm.
PETRUCHIO
Marry, so I mean, sweet Katharina, in thy bed:
And therefore, setting all this chat aside,
Thus in plain terms: your father hath consented
That you shall be my wife; your dowry 'greed on;
And, Will you, nill you, I will marry you.
Now, Kate, I am a husband for your turn;
For, by this light, whereby I see thy beauty,
Thy beauty, that doth make me like thee well,
Thou must be married to no man but me;
For I am he am born to tame you Kate,
And bring you from a wild Kate to a Kate
Conformable as other household Kates.
Here comes your father: never make denial;
I must and will have Katharina to my wife.
Re-enter BAPTISTA, GREMIO, and TRANIO

BAPTISTA
Now, Signior Petruchio, how speed you with my daughter?
PETRUCHIO
How but well, sir? how but well?
It were impossible I should speed amiss.
BAPTISTA
Why, how now, daughter Katharina! in your dumps?
KATHARINA
Call you me daughter? now, I promise you
You have show'd a tender fatherly regard,
To wish me wed to one half lunatic;
A mad-cup ruffian and a swearing Jack,
That thinks with oaths to face the matter out.
PETRUCHIO
Father, 'tis thus: yourself and all the world,
That talk'd of her, have talk'd amiss of her:
If she be curst, it is for policy,
For she's not froward, but modest as the dove;
She is not hot, but temperate as the morn;
For patience she will prove a second Grissel,
And Roman Lucrece for her chastity:
And to conclude, we have 'greed so well together,
That upon Sunday is the wedding-day.
KATHARINA
I'll see thee hang'd on Sunday first.
GREMIO
Hark, Petruchio; she says she'll see thee
hang'd first.
TRANIO
Is this your speeding? nay, then, good night our part!
PETRUCHIO
Be patient, gentlemen; I choose her for myself:
If she and I be pleased, what's that to you?
'Tis bargain'd 'twixt us twain, being alone,
That she shall still be curst in company.
I tell you, 'tis incredible to believe
How much she loves me: O, the kindest Kate!
She hung about my neck; and kiss on kiss
She vied so fast, protesting oath on oath,
That in a twink she won me to her love.
O, you are novices! 'tis a world to see,
How tame, when men and women are alone,
A meacock wretch can make the curstest shrew.
Give me thy hand, Kate: I will unto Venice,
To buy apparel 'gainst the wedding-day.
Provide the feast, father, and bid the guests;
I will be sure my Katharina shall be fine.
BAPTISTA
I know not what to say: but give me your hands;
God send you joy, Petruchio! 'tis a match.
GREMIO TRANIO
Amen, say we: we will be witnesses.
PETRUCHIO
Father, and wife, and gentlemen, adieu;
I will to Venice; Sunday comes apace:
We will have rings and things and fine array;
And kiss me, Kate, we will be married o'Sunday.
Exeunt PETRUCHIO and KATHARINA severally

GREMIO
Was ever match clapp'd up so suddenly?
BAPTISTA
Faith, gentlemen, now I play a merchant's part,
And venture madly on a desperate mart.
TRANIO
'Twas a commodity lay fretting by you:
'Twill bring you gain, or perish on the seas.
BAPTISTA
The gain I seek is, quiet in the match.
GREMIO
No doubt but he hath got a quiet catch.
But now, Baptists, to your younger daughter:
Now is the day we long have looked for:
I am your neighbour, and was suitor first.
TRANIO
And I am one that love Bianca more
Than words can witness, or your thoughts can guess.
GREMIO
Youngling, thou canst not love so dear as I.
TRANIO
Graybeard, thy love doth freeze.
GREMIO
But thine doth fry.
Skipper, stand back: 'tis age that nourisheth.
TRANIO
But youth in ladies' eyes that flourisheth.
BAPTISTA
Content you, gentlemen: I will compound this strife:
'Tis deeds must win the prize; and he of both
That can assure my daughter greatest dower
Shall have my Bianca's love.
Say, Signior Gremio, What can you assure her?
GREMIO
First, as you know, my house within the city
Is richly furnished with plate and gold;
Basins and ewers to lave her dainty hands;
My hangings all of Tyrian tapestry;
In ivory coffers I have stuff'd my crowns;
In cypress chests my arras counterpoints,
Costly apparel, tents, and canopies,
Fine linen, Turkey cushions boss'd with pearl,
Valance of Venice gold in needlework,
Pewter and brass and all things that belong
To house or housekeeping: then, at my farm
I have a hundred milch-kine to the pail,
Sixscore fat oxen standing in my stalls,
And all things answerable to this portion.
Myself am struck in years, I must confess;
And if I die to-morrow, this is hers,
If whilst I live she will be only mine.
TRANIO
That 'only' came well in. Sir, list to me:
I am my father's heir and only son:
If I may have your daughter to my wife,
I'll leave her houses three or four as good,
Within rich Pisa walls, as any one
Old Signior Gremio has in Padua;
Besides two thousand ducats by the year
Of fruitful land, all which shall be her jointure.
What, have I pinch'd you, Signior Gremio?
GREMIO
Two thousand ducats by the year of land!
My land amounts not to so much in all:
That she shall have; besides an argosy
That now is lying in Marseilles' road.
What, have I choked you with an argosy?
TRANIO
Gremio, 'tis known my father hath no less
Than three great argosies; besides two galliases,
And twelve tight galleys: these I will assure her,
And twice as much, whate'er thou offer'st next.
GREMIO
Nay, I have offer'd all, I have no more;
And she can have no more than all I have:
If you like me, she shall have me and mine.
TRANIO
Why, then the maid is mine from all the world,
By your firm promise: Gremio is out-vied.
BAPTISTA
I must confess your offer is the best;
And, let your father make her the assurance,
She is your own; else, you must pardon me,
if you should die before him, where's her dower?
TRANIO
That's but a cavil: he is old, I young.
GREMIO
And may not young men die, as well as old?
BAPTISTA
Well, gentlemen,
I am thus resolved: on Sunday next you know
My daughter Katharina is to be married:
Now, on the Sunday following, shall Bianca
Be bride to you, if you this assurance;
If not, Signior Gremio:
And so, I take my leave, and thank you both.
GREMIO
Adieu, good neighbour.
Exit BAPTISTA

Now I fear thee not:
Sirrah young gamester, your father were a fool
To give thee all, and in his waning age
Set foot under thy table: tut, a toy!
An old Italian fox is not so kind, my boy.
Exit

TRANIO
A vengeance on your crafty wither'd hide!
Yet I have faced it with a card of ten.
'Tis in my head to do my master good:
I see no reason but supposed Lucentio
Must get a father, call'd 'supposed Vincentio;'
And that's a wonder: fathers commonly
Do get their children; but in this case of wooing,
A child shall get a sire, if I fail not of my cunning.
Exit

ACT III
SCENE I. Padua. BAPTISTA'S house.
Enter LUCENTIO, HORTENSIO, and BIANCA
LUCENTIO
Fiddler, forbear; you grow too forward, sir:
Have you so soon forgot the entertainment
Her sister Katharina welcomed you withal?
HORTENSIO
But, wrangling pedant, this is
The patroness of heavenly harmony:
Then give me leave to have prerogative;
And when in music we have spent an hour,
Your lecture shall have leisure for as much.
LUCENTIO
Preposterous ass, that never read so far
To know the cause why music was ordain'd!
Was it not to refresh the mind of man
After his studies or his usual pain?
Then give me leave to read philosophy,
And while I pause, serve in your harmony.
HORTENSIO
Sirrah, I will not bear these braves of thine.
BIANCA
Why, gentlemen, you do me double wrong,
To strive for that which resteth in my choice:
I am no breeching scholar in the schools;
I'll not be tied to hours nor 'pointed times,
But learn my lessons as I please myself.
And, to cut off all strife, here sit we down:
Take you your instrument, play you the whiles;
His lecture will be done ere you have tuned.
HORTENSIO
You'll leave his lecture when I am in tune?
LUCENTIO
That will be never: tune your instrument.
BIANCA
Where left we last?
LUCENTIO
Here, madam:
'Hic ibat Simois; hic est Sigeia tellus;
Hic steterat Priami regia celsa senis.'
BIANCA
Construe them.
LUCENTIO
'Hic ibat,' as I told you before, 'Simois,' I am
Lucentio, 'hic est,' son unto Vincentio of Pisa,
'Sigeia tellus,' disguised thus to get your love;
'Hic steterat,' and that Lucentio that comes
a-wooing, 'Priami,' is my man Tranio, 'regia,'
bearing my port, 'celsa senis,' that we might
beguile the old pantaloon.
HORTENSIO
Madam, my instrument's in tune.
BIANCA
Let's hear. O fie! the treble jars.
LUCENTIO
Spit in the hole, man, and tune again.
BIANCA
Now let me see if I can construe it: 'Hic ibat
Simois,' I know you not, 'hic est Sigeia tellus,' I
trust you not; 'Hic steterat Priami,' take heed
he hear us not, 'regia,' presume not, 'celsa senis,'
despair not.
HORTENSIO
Madam, 'tis now in tune.
LUCENTIO
All but the base.
HORTENSIO
The base is right; 'tis the base knave that jars.
Aside

How fiery and forward our pedant is!
Now, for my life, the knave doth court my love:
Pedascule, I'll watch you better yet.
BIANCA
In time I may believe, yet I mistrust.
LUCENTIO
Mistrust it not: for, sure, AEacides
Was Ajax, call'd so from his grandfather.
BIANCA
I must believe my master; else, I promise you,
I should be arguing still upon that doubt:
But let it rest. Now, Licio, to you:
Good masters, take it not unkindly, pray,
That I have been thus pleasant with you both.
HORTENSIO
You may go walk, and give me leave a while:
My lessons make no music in three parts.
LUCENTIO
Are you so formal, sir? well, I must wait,
Aside

And watch withal; for, but I be deceived,
Our fine musician groweth amorous.
HORTENSIO
Madam, before you touch the instrument,
To learn the order of my fingering,
I must begin with rudiments of art;
To teach you gamut in a briefer sort,
More pleasant, pithy and effectual,
Than hath been taught by any of my trade:
And there it is in writing, fairly drawn.
BIANCA
Why, I am past my gamut long ago.
HORTENSIO
Yet read the gamut of Hortensio.
BIANCA
[Reads] ''Gamut' I am, the ground of all accord,
'A re,' to Plead Hortensio's passion;
'B mi,' Bianca, take him for thy lord,
'C fa ut,' that loves with all affection:
'D sol re,' one clef, two notes have I:
'E la mi,' show pity, or I die.'
Call you this gamut? tut, I like it not:
Old fashions please me best; I am not so nice,
To change true rules for old inventions.
Enter a Servant

Servant
Mistress, your father prays you leave your books
And help to dress your sister's chamber up:
You know to-morrow is the wedding-day.
BIANCA
Farewell, sweet masters both; I must be gone.
Exeunt BIANCA and Servant

LUCENTIO
Faith, mistress, then I have no cause to stay.
Exit

HORTENSIO
But I have cause to pry into this pedant:
Methinks he looks as though he were in love:
Yet if thy thoughts, Bianca, be so humble
To cast thy wandering eyes on every stale,
Seize thee that list: if once I find thee ranging,
Hortensio will be quit with thee by changing.
Exit

SCENE II. Padua. Before BAPTISTA'S house.
Enter BAPTISTA, GREMIO, TRANIO, KATHARINA, BIANCA, LUCENTIO, and others, attendants
BAPTISTA
[To TRANIO] Signior Lucentio, this is the
'pointed day.
That Katharina and Petruchio should be married,
And yet we hear not of our son-in-law.
What will be said? what mockery will it be,
To want the bridegroom when the priest attends
To speak the ceremonial rites of marriage!
What says Lucentio to this shame of ours?
KATHARINA
No shame but mine: I must, forsooth, be forced
To give my hand opposed against my heart
Unto a mad-brain rudesby full of spleen;
Who woo'd in haste and means to wed at leisure.
I told you, I, he was a frantic fool,
Hiding his bitter jests in blunt behavior:
And, to be noted for a merry man,
He'll woo a thousand, 'point the day of marriage,
Make feasts, invite friends, and proclaim the banns;
Yet never means to wed where he hath woo'd.
Now must the world point at poor Katharina,
And say, 'Lo, there is mad Petruchio's wife,
If it would please him come and marry her!'
TRANIO
Patience, good Katharina, and Baptista too.
Upon my life, Petruchio means but well,
Whatever fortune stays him from his word:
Though he be blunt, I know him passing wise;
Though he be merry, yet withal he's honest.
KATHARINA
Would Katharina had never seen him though!
Exit weeping, followed by BIANCA and others

BAPTISTA
Go, girl; I cannot blame thee now to weep;
For such an injury would vex a very saint,
Much more a shrew of thy impatient humour.
Enter BIONDELLO

BIONDELLO
Master, master! news, old news, and such news as
you never heard of!
BAPTISTA
Is it new and old too? how may that be?
BIONDELLO
Why, is it not news, to hear of Petruchio's coming?
BAPTISTA
Is he come?
BIONDELLO
Why, no, sir.
BAPTISTA
What then?
BIONDELLO
He is coming.
BAPTISTA
When will he be here?
BIONDELLO
When he stands where I am and sees you there.
TRANIO
But say, what to thine old news?
BIONDELLO
Why, Petruchio is coming in a new hat and an old
jerkin, a pair of old breeches thrice turned, a pair
of boots that have been candle-cases, one buckled,
another laced, an old rusty sword ta'en out of the
town-armory, with a broken hilt, and chapeless;
with two broken points: his horse hipped with an
old mothy saddle and stirrups of no kindred;
besides, possessed with the glanders and like to mose
in the chine; troubled with the lampass, infected
with the fashions, full of wingdalls, sped with
spavins, rayed with yellows, past cure of the fives,
stark spoiled with the staggers, begnawn with the
bots, swayed in the back and shoulder-shotten;
near-legged before and with, a half-chequed bit
and a head-stall of sheeps leather which, being
restrained to keep him from stumbling, hath been
often burst and now repaired with knots; one girth
six time pieced and a woman's crupper of velure,
which hath two letters for her name fairly set down
in studs, and here and there pieced with packthread.
BAPTISTA
Who comes with him?
BIONDELLO
O, sir, his lackey, for all the world caparisoned
like the horse; with a linen stock on one leg and a
kersey boot-hose on the other, gartered with a red
and blue list; an old hat and 'the humour of forty
fancies' pricked in't for a feather: a monster, a
very monster in apparel, and not like a Christian
footboy or a gentleman's lackey.
TRANIO
'Tis some odd humour pricks him to this fashion;
Yet oftentimes he goes but mean-apparell'd.
BAPTISTA
I am glad he's come, howsoe'er he comes.
BIONDELLO
Why, sir, he comes not.
BAPTISTA
Didst thou not say he comes?
BIONDELLO
Who? that Petruchio came?
BAPTISTA
Ay, that Petruchio came.
BIONDELLO
No, sir, I say his horse comes, with him on his back.
BAPTISTA
Why, that's all one.
BIONDELLO
Nay, by Saint Jamy,
I hold you a penny,
A horse and a man
Is more than one,
And yet not many.
Enter PETRUCHIO and GRUMIO

PETRUCHIO
Come, where be these gallants? who's at home?
BAPTISTA
You are welcome, sir.
PETRUCHIO
And yet I come not well.
BAPTISTA
And yet you halt not.
TRANIO
Not so well apparell'd
As I wish you were.
PETRUCHIO
Were it better, I should rush in thus.
But where is Kate? where is my lovely bride?
How does my father? Gentles, methinks you frown:
And wherefore gaze this goodly company,
As if they saw some wondrous monument,
Some comet or unusual prodigy?
BAPTISTA
Why, sir, you know this is your wedding-day:
First were we sad, fearing you would not come;
Now sadder, that you come so unprovided.
Fie, doff this habit, shame to your estate,
An eye-sore to our solemn festival!
TRANIO
And tells us, what occasion of import
Hath all so long detain'd you from your wife,
And sent you hither so unlike yourself?
PETRUCHIO
Tedious it were to tell, and harsh to hear:
Sufficeth I am come to keep my word,
Though in some part enforced to digress;
Which, at more leisure, I will so excuse
As you shall well be satisfied withal.
But where is Kate? I stay too long from her:
The morning wears, 'tis time we were at church.
TRANIO
See not your bride in these unreverent robes:
Go to my chamber; Put on clothes of mine.
PETRUCHIO
Not I, believe me: thus I'll visit her.
BAPTISTA
But thus, I trust, you will not marry her.
PETRUCHIO
Good sooth, even thus; therefore ha' done with words:
To me she's married, not unto my clothes:
Could I repair what she will wear in me,
As I can change these poor accoutrements,
'Twere well for Kate and better for myself.
But what a fool am I to chat with you,
When I should bid good morrow to my bride,
And seal the title with a lovely kiss!
Exeunt PETRUCHIO and GRUMIO

TRANIO
He hath some meaning in his mad attire:
We will persuade him, be it possible,
To put on better ere he go to church.
BAPTISTA
I'll after him, and see the event of this.
Exeunt BAPTISTA, GREMIO, and attendants

TRANIO
But to her love concerneth us to add
Her father's liking: which to bring to pass,
As I before unparted to your worship,
I am to get a man,--whate'er he be,
It skills not much. we'll fit him to our turn,--
And he shall be Vincentio of Pisa;
And make assurance here in Padua
Of greater sums than I have promised.
So shall you quietly enjoy your hope,
And marry sweet Bianca with consent.
LUCENTIO
Were it not that my fellow-school-master
Doth watch Bianca's steps so narrowly,
'Twere good, methinks, to steal our marriage;
Which once perform'd, let all the world say no,
I'll keep mine own, despite of all the world.
TRANIO
That by degrees we mean to look into,
And watch our vantage in this business:
We'll over-reach the greybeard, Gremio,
The narrow-prying father, Minola,
The quaint musician, amorous Licio;
All for my master's sake, Lucentio.
Re-enter GREMIO

Signior Gremio, came you from the church?
GREMIO
As willingly as e'er I came from school.
TRANIO
And is the bride and bridegroom coming home?
GREMIO
A bridegroom say you? 'tis a groom indeed,
A grumbling groom, and that the girl shall find.
TRANIO
Curster than she? why, 'tis impossible.
GREMIO
Why he's a devil, a devil, a very fiend.
TRANIO
Why, she's a devil, a devil, the devil's dam.
GREMIO
Tut, she's a lamb, a dove, a fool to him!
I'll tell you, Sir Lucentio: when the priest
Should ask, if Katharina should be his wife,
'Ay, by gogs-wouns,' quoth he; and swore so loud,
That, all-amazed, the priest let fall the book;
And, as he stoop'd again to take it up,
The mad-brain'd bridegroom took him such a cuff
That down fell priest and book and book and priest:
'Now take them up,' quoth he, 'if any list.'
TRANIO
What said the wench when he rose again?
GREMIO
Trembled and shook; for why, he stamp'd and swore,
As if the vicar meant to cozen him.
But after many ceremonies done,
He calls for wine: 'A health!' quoth he, as if
He had been aboard, carousing to his mates
After a storm; quaff'd off the muscadel
And threw the sops all in the sexton's face;
Having no other reason
But that his beard grew thin and hungerly
And seem'd to ask him sops as he was drinking.
This done, he took the bride about the neck
And kiss'd her lips with such a clamorous smack
That at the parting all the church did echo:
And I seeing this came thence for very shame;
And after me, I know, the rout is coming.
Such a mad marriage never was before:
Hark, hark! I hear the minstrels play.
Music

Re-enter PETRUCHIO, KATHARINA, BIANCA, BAPTISTA, HORTENSIO, GRUMIO, and Train

PETRUCHIO
Gentlemen and friends, I thank you for your pains:
I know you think to dine with me to-day,
And have prepared great store of wedding cheer;
But so it is, my haste doth call me hence,
And therefore here I mean to take my leave.
BAPTISTA
Is't possible you will away to-night?
PETRUCHIO
I must away to-day, before night come:
Make it no wonder; if you knew my business,
You would entreat me rather go than stay.
And, honest company, I thank you all,
That have beheld me give away myself
To this most patient, sweet and virtuous wife:
Dine with my father, drink a health to me;
For I must hence; and farewell to you all.
TRANIO
Let us entreat you stay till after dinner.
PETRUCHIO
It may not be.
GREMIO
Let me entreat you.
PETRUCHIO
It cannot be.
KATHARINA
Let me entreat you.
PETRUCHIO
I am content.
KATHARINA
Are you content to stay?
PETRUCHIO
I am content you shall entreat me stay;
But yet not stay, entreat me how you can.
KATHARINA
Now, if you love me, stay.
PETRUCHIO
Grumio, my horse.
GRUMIO
Ay, sir, they be ready: the oats have eaten the horses.
KATHARINA
Nay, then,
Do what thou canst, I will not go to-day;
No, nor to-morrow, not till I please myself.
The door is open, sir; there lies your way;
You may be jogging whiles your boots are green;
For me, I'll not be gone till I please myself:
'Tis like you'll prove a jolly surly groom,
That take it on you at the first so roundly.
PETRUCHIO
O Kate, content thee; prithee, be not angry.
KATHARINA
I will be angry: what hast thou to do?
Father, be quiet; he shall stay my leisure.
GREMIO
Ay, marry, sir, now it begins to work.
KATARINA
Gentlemen, forward to the bridal dinner:
I see a woman may be made a fool,
If she had not a spirit to resist.
PETRUCHIO
They shall go forward, Kate, at thy command.
Obey the bride, you that attend on her;
Go to the feast, revel and domineer,
Carouse full measure to her maidenhead,
Be mad and merry, or go hang yourselves:
But for my bonny Kate, she must with me.
Nay, look not big, nor stamp, nor stare, nor fret;
I will be master of what is mine own:
She is my goods, my chattels; she is my house,
My household stuff, my field, my barn,
My horse, my ox, my ass, my any thing;
And here she stands, touch her whoever dare;
I'll bring mine action on the proudest he
That stops my way in Padua. Grumio,
Draw forth thy weapon, we are beset with thieves;
Rescue thy mistress, if thou be a man.
Fear not, sweet wench, they shall not touch
thee, Kate:
I'll buckler thee against a million.
Exeunt PETRUCHIO, KATHARINA, and GRUMIO

BAPTISTA
Nay, let them go, a couple of quiet ones.
GREMIO
Went they not quickly, I should die with laughing.
TRANIO
Of all mad matches never was the like.
LUCENTIO
Mistress, what's your opinion of your sister?
BIANCA
That, being mad herself, she's madly mated.
GREMIO
I warrant him, Petruchio is Kated.
BAPTISTA
Neighbours and friends, though bride and
bridegroom wants
For to supply the places at the table,
You know there wants no junkets at the feast.
Lucentio, you shall supply the bridegroom's place:
And let Bianca take her sister's room.
TRANIO
Shall sweet Bianca practise how to bride it?
BAPTISTA
She shall, Lucentio. Come, gentlemen, let's go.
Exeunt

ACT IV
SCENE I. PETRUCHIO'S country house.
Enter GRUMIO
GRUMIO
Fie, fie on all tired jades, on all mad masters, and
all foul ways! Was ever man so beaten? was ever
man so rayed? was ever man so weary? I am sent
before to make a fire, and they are coming after to
warm them. Now, were not I a little pot and soon
hot, my very lips might freeze to my teeth, my
tongue to the roof of my mouth, my heart in my
belly, ere I should come by a fire to thaw me: but
I, with blowing the fire, shall warm myself; for,
considering the weather, a taller man than I will
take cold. Holla, ho! Curtis.
Enter CURTIS

CURTIS
Who is that calls so coldly?
GRUMIO
A piece of ice: if thou doubt it, thou mayst slide
from my shoulder to my heel with no greater a run
but my head and my neck. A fire good Curtis.
CURTIS
Is my master and his wife coming, Grumio?
GRUMIO
O, ay, Curtis, ay: and therefore fire, fire; cast
on no water.
CURTIS
Is she so hot a shrew as she's reported?
GRUMIO
She was, good Curtis, before this frost: but, thou
knowest, winter tames man, woman and beast; for it
hath tamed my old master and my new mistress and
myself, fellow Curtis.
CURTIS
Away, you three-inch fool! I am no beast.
GRUMIO
Am I but three inches? why, thy horn is a foot; and
so long am I at the least. But wilt thou make a
fire, or shall I complain on thee to our mistress,
whose hand, she being now at hand, thou shalt soon
feel, to thy cold comfort, for being slow in thy hot office?
CURTIS
I prithee, good Grumio, tell me, how goes the world?
GRUMIO
A cold world, Curtis, in every office but thine; and
therefore fire: do thy duty, and have thy duty; for
my master and mistress are almost frozen to death.
CURTIS
There's fire ready; and therefore, good Grumio, the news.
GRUMIO
Why, 'Jack, boy! ho! boy!' and as much news as
will thaw.
CURTIS
Come, you are so full of cony-catching!
GRUMIO
Why, therefore fire; for I have caught extreme cold.
Where's the cook? is supper ready, the house
trimmed, rushes strewed, cobwebs swept; the
serving-men in their new fustian, their white
stockings, and every officer his wedding-garment on?
Be the jacks fair within, the jills fair without,
the carpets laid, and every thing in order?
CURTIS
All ready; and therefore, I pray thee, news.
GRUMIO
First, know, my horse is tired; my master and
mistress fallen out.
CURTIS
How?
GRUMIO
Out of their saddles into the dirt; and thereby
hangs a tale.
CURTIS
Let's ha't, good Grumio.
GRUMIO
Lend thine ear.
CURTIS
Here.
GRUMIO
There.
Strikes him

CURTIS
This is to feel a tale, not to hear a tale.
GRUMIO
And therefore 'tis called a sensible tale: and this
cuff was but to knock at your ear, and beseech
listening. Now I begin: Imprimis, we came down a
foul hill, my master riding behind my mistress,--
CURTIS
Both of one horse?
GRUMIO
What's that to thee?
CURTIS
Why, a horse.
GRUMIO
Tell thou the tale: but hadst thou not crossed me,
thou shouldst have heard how her horse fell and she
under her horse; thou shouldst have heard in how
miry a place, how she was bemoiled, how he left her
with the horse upon her, how he beat me because
her horse stumbled, how she waded through the dirt
to pluck him off me, how he swore, how she prayed,
that never prayed before, how I cried, how the
horses ran away, how her bridle was burst, how I
lost my crupper, with many things of worthy memory,
which now shall die in oblivion and thou return
unexperienced to thy grave.
CURTIS
By this reckoning he is more shrew than she.
GRUMIO
Ay; and that thou and the proudest of you all shall
find when he comes home. But what talk I of this?
Call forth Nathaniel, Joseph, Nicholas, Philip,
Walter, Sugarsop and the rest: let their heads be
sleekly combed their blue coats brushed and their
garters of an indifferent knit: let them curtsy
with their left legs and not presume to touch a hair
of my master's horse-tail till they kiss their
hands. Are they all ready?
CURTIS
They are.
GRUMIO
Call them forth.
CURTIS
Do you hear, ho? you must meet my master to
countenance my mistress.
GRUMIO
Why, she hath a face of her own.
CURTIS
Who knows not that?
GRUMIO
Thou, it seems, that calls for company to
countenance her.
CURTIS
I call them forth to credit her.
GRUMIO
Why, she comes to borrow nothing of them.
Enter four or five Serving-men

NATHANIEL
Welcome home, Grumio!
PHILIP
How now, Grumio!
JOSEPH
What, Grumio!
NICHOLAS
Fellow Grumio!
NATHANIEL
How now, old lad?
GRUMIO
Welcome, you;--how now, you;-- what, you;--fellow,
you;--and thus much for greeting. Now, my spruce
companions, is all ready, and all things neat?
NATHANIEL
All things is ready. How near is our master?
GRUMIO
E'en at hand, alighted by this; and therefore be
not--Cock's passion, silence! I hear my master.
Enter PETRUCHIO and KATHARINA

PETRUCHIO
Where be these knaves? What, no man at door
To hold my stirrup nor to take my horse!
Where is Nathaniel, Gregory, Philip?
ALL SERVING-MEN Here, here, sir; here, sir.
PETRUCHIO
Here, sir! here, sir! here, sir! here, sir!
You logger-headed and unpolish'd grooms!
What, no attendance? no regard? no duty?
Where is the foolish knave I sent before?
GRUMIO
Here, sir; as foolish as I was before.
PETRUCHIO
You peasant swain! you whoreson malt-horse drudge!
Did I not bid thee meet me in the park,
And bring along these rascal knaves with thee?
GRUMIO
Nathaniel's coat, sir, was not fully made,
And Gabriel's pumps were all unpink'd i' the heel;
There was no link to colour Peter's hat,
And Walter's dagger was not come from sheathing:
There were none fine but Adam, Ralph, and Gregory;
The rest were ragged, old, and beggarly;
Yet, as they are, here are they come to meet you.
PETRUCHIO
Go, rascals, go, and fetch my supper in.
Exeunt Servants

Singing

Where is the life that late I led--
Where are those--Sit down, Kate, and welcome.--
Sound, sound, sound, sound!
Re-enter Servants with supper

Why, when, I say? Nay, good sweet Kate, be merry.
Off with my boots, you rogues! you villains, when?
Sings

It was the friar of orders grey,
As he forth walked on his way:--
Out, you rogue! you pluck my foot awry:
Take that, and mend the plucking off the other.
Strikes him

Be merry, Kate. Some water, here; what, ho!
Where's my spaniel Troilus? Sirrah, get you hence,
And bid my cousin Ferdinand come hither:
One, Kate, that you must kiss, and be acquainted with.
Where are my slippers? Shall I have some water?
Enter one with water

Come, Kate, and wash, and welcome heartily.
You whoreson villain! will you let it fall?
Strikes him

KATHARINA
Patience, I pray you; 'twas a fault unwilling.
PETRUCHIO
A whoreson beetle-headed, flap-ear'd knave!
Come, Kate, sit down; I know you have a stomach.
Will you give thanks, sweet Kate; or else shall I?
What's this? mutton?
First Servant
Ay.
PETRUCHIO
Who brought it?
PETER
I.
PETRUCHIO
'Tis burnt; and so is all the meat.
What dogs are these! Where is the rascal cook?
How durst you, villains, bring it from the dresser,
And serve it thus to me that love it not?
Theretake it to you, trenchers, cups, and all;
Throws the meat, & c. about the stage

You heedless joltheads and unmanner'd slaves!
What, do you grumble? I'll be with you straight.
KATHARINA
I pray you, husband, be not so disquiet:
The meat was well, if you were so contented.
PETRUCHIO
I tell thee, Kate, 'twas burnt and dried away;
And I expressly am forbid to touch it,
For it engenders choler, planteth anger;
And better 'twere that both of us did fast,
Since, of ourselves, ourselves are choleric,
Than feed it with such over-roasted flesh.
Be patient; to-morrow 't shall be mended,
And, for this night, we'll fast for company:
Come, I will bring thee to thy bridal chamber.
Exeunt

Re-enter Servants severally

NATHANIEL
Peter, didst ever see the like?
PETER
He kills her in her own humour.
Re-enter CURTIS

GRUMIO
Where is he?
CURTIS
In her chamber, making a sermon of continency to her;
And rails, and swears, and rates, that she, poor soul,
Knows not which way to stand, to look, to speak,
And sits as one new-risen from a dream.
Away, away! for he is coming hither.
Exeunt

Re-enter PETRUCHIO

PETRUCHIO
Thus have I politicly begun my reign,
And 'tis my hope to end successfully.
My falcon now is sharp and passing empty;
And till she stoop she must not be full-gorged,
For then she never looks upon her lure.
Another way I have to man my haggard,
To make her come and know her keeper's call,
That is, to watch her, as we watch these kites
That bate and beat and will not be obedient.
She eat no meat to-day, nor none shall eat;
Last night she slept not, nor to-night she shall not;
As with the meat, some undeserved fault
I'll find about the making of the bed;
And here I'll fling the pillow, there the bolster,
This way the coverlet, another way the sheets:
Ay, and amid this hurly I intend
That all is done in reverend care of her;
And in conclusion she shall watch all night:
And if she chance to nod I'll rail and brawl
And with the clamour keep her still awake.
This is a way to kill a wife with kindness;
And thus I'll curb her mad and headstrong humour.
He that knows better how to tame a shrew,
Now let him speak: 'tis charity to show.
Exit

SCENE II. Padua. Before BAPTISTA'S house.
Enter TRANIO and HORTENSIO
TRANIO
Is't possible, friend Licio, that Mistress Bianca
Doth fancy any other but Lucentio?
I tell you, sir, she bears me fair in hand.
HORTENSIO
Sir, to satisfy you in what I have said,
Stand by and mark the manner of his teaching.
Enter BIANCA and LUCENTIO

LUCENTIO
Now, mistress, profit you in what you read?
BIANCA
What, master, read you? first resolve me that.
LUCENTIO
I read that I profess, the Art to Love.
BIANCA
And may you prove, sir, master of your art!
LUCENTIO
While you, sweet dear, prove mistress of my heart!
HORTENSIO
Quick proceeders, marry! Now, tell me, I pray,
You that durst swear at your mistress Bianca
Loved none in the world so well as Lucentio.
TRANIO
O despiteful love! unconstant womankind!
I tell thee, Licio, this is wonderful.
HORTENSIO
Mistake no more: I am not Licio,
Nor a musician, as I seem to be;
But one that scorn to live in this disguise,
For such a one as leaves a gentleman,
And makes a god of such a cullion:
Know, sir, that I am call'd Hortensio.
TRANIO
Signior Hortensio, I have often heard
Of your entire affection to Bianca;
And since mine eyes are witness of her lightness,
I will with you, if you be so contented,
Forswear Bianca and her love for ever.
HORTENSIO
See, how they kiss and court! Signior Lucentio,
Here is my hand, and here I firmly vow
Never to woo her no more, but do forswear her,
As one unworthy all the former favours
That I have fondly flatter'd her withal.
TRANIO
And here I take the unfeigned oath,
Never to marry with her though she would entreat:
Fie on her! see, how beastly she doth court him!
HORTENSIO
Would all the world but he had quite forsworn!
For me, that I may surely keep mine oath,
I will be married to a wealthy widow,
Ere three days pass, which hath as long loved me
As I have loved this proud disdainful haggard.
And so farewell, Signior Lucentio.
Kindness in women, not their beauteous looks,
Shall win my love: and so I take my leave,
In resolution as I swore before.
Exit

TRANIO
Mistress Bianca, bless you with such grace
As 'longeth to a lover's blessed case!
Nay, I have ta'en you napping, gentle love,
And have forsworn you with Hortensio.
BIANCA
Tranio, you jest: but have you both forsworn me?
TRANIO
Mistress, we have.
LUCENTIO
Then we are rid of Licio.
TRANIO
I' faith, he'll have a lusty widow now,
That shall be wood and wedded in a day.
BIANCA
God give him joy!
TRANIO
Ay, and he'll tame her.
BIANCA
He says so, Tranio.
TRANIO
Faith, he is gone unto the taming-school.
BIANCA
The taming-school! what, is there such a place?
TRANIO
Ay, mistress, and Petruchio is the master;
That teacheth tricks eleven and twenty long,
To tame a shrew and charm her chattering tongue.
Enter BIONDELLO

BIONDELLO
O master, master, I have watch'd so long
That I am dog-weary: but at last I spied
An ancient angel coming down the hill,
Will serve the turn.
TRANIO
What is he, Biondello?
BIONDELLO
Master, a mercatante, or a pedant,
I know not what; but format in apparel,
In gait and countenance surely like a father.
LUCENTIO
And what of him, Tranio?
TRANIO
If he be credulous and trust my tale,
I'll make him glad to seem Vincentio,
And give assurance to Baptista Minola,
As if he were the right Vincentio
Take in your love, and then let me alone.
Exeunt LUCENTIO and BIANCA

Enter a Pedant

Pedant
God save you, sir!
TRANIO
And you, sir! you are welcome.
Travel you far on, or are you at the farthest?
Pedant
Sir, at the farthest for a week or two:
But then up farther, and as for as Rome;
And so to Tripoli, if God lend me life.
TRANIO
What countryman, I pray?
Pedant
Of Mantua.
TRANIO
Of Mantua, sir? marry, God forbid!
And come to Padua, careless of your life?
Pedant
My life, sir! how, I pray? for that goes hard.
TRANIO
'Tis death for any one in Mantua
To come to Padua. Know you not the cause?
Your ships are stay'd at Venice, and the duke,
For private quarrel 'twixt your duke and him,
Hath publish'd and proclaim'd it openly:
'Tis, marvel, but that you are but newly come,
You might have heard it else proclaim'd about.
Pedant
Alas! sir, it is worse for me than so;
For I have bills for money by exchange
From Florence and must here deliver them.
TRANIO
Well, sir, to do you courtesy,
This will I do, and this I will advise you:
First, tell me, have you ever been at Pisa?
Pedant
Ay, sir, in Pisa have I often been,
Pisa renowned for grave citizens.
TRANIO
Among them know you one Vincentio?
Pedant
I know him not, but I have heard of him;
A merchant of incomparable wealth.
TRANIO
He is my father, sir; and, sooth to say,
In countenance somewhat doth resemble you.
BIONDELLO
[Aside] As much as an apple doth an oyster,
and all one.
TRANIO
To save your life in this extremity,
This favour will I do you for his sake;
And think it not the worst of an your fortunes
That you are like to Sir Vincentio.
His name and credit shall you undertake,
And in my house you shall be friendly lodged:
Look that you take upon you as you should;
You understand me, sir: so shall you stay
Till you have done your business in the city:
If this be courtesy, sir, accept of it.
Pedant
O sir, I do; and will repute you ever
The patron of my life and liberty.
TRANIO
Then go with me to make the matter good.
This, by the way, I let you understand;
my father is here look'd for every day,
To pass assurance of a dower in marriage
'Twixt me and one Baptista's daughter here:
In all these circumstances I'll instruct you:
Go with me to clothe you as becomes you.
Exeunt

SCENE III. A room in PETRUCHIO'S house.
Enter KATHARINA and GRUMIO
GRUMIO
No, no, forsooth; I dare not for my life.
KATHARINA
The more my wrong, the more his spite appears:
What, did he marry me to famish me?
Beggars, that come unto my father's door,
Upon entreaty have a present aims;
If not, elsewhere they meet with charity:
But I, who never knew how to entreat,
Nor never needed that I should entreat,
Am starved for meat, giddy for lack of sleep,
With oath kept waking and with brawling fed:
And that which spites me more than all these wants,
He does it under name of perfect love;
As who should say, if I should sleep or eat,
'Twere deadly sickness or else present death.
I prithee go and get me some repast;
I care not what, so it be wholesome food.
GRUMIO
What say you to a neat's foot?
KATHARINA
'Tis passing good: I prithee let me have it.
GRUMIO
I fear it is too choleric a meat.
How say you to a fat tripe finely broil'd?
KATHARINA
I like it well: good Grumio, fetch it me.
GRUMIO
I cannot tell; I fear 'tis choleric.
What say you to a piece of beef and mustard?
KATHARINA
A dish that I do love to feed upon.
GRUMIO
Ay, but the mustard is too hot a little.
KATHARINA
Why then, the beef, and let the mustard rest.
GRUMIO
Nay then, I will not: you shall have the mustard,
Or else you get no beef of Grumio.
KATHARINA
Then both, or one, or any thing thou wilt.
GRUMIO
Why then, the mustard without the beef.
KATHARINA
Go, get thee gone, thou false deluding slave,
Beats him

That feed'st me with the very name of meat:
Sorrow on thee and all the pack of you,
That triumph thus upon my misery!
Go, get thee gone, I say.
Enter PETRUCHIO and HORTENSIO with meat

PETRUCHIO
How fares my Kate? What, sweeting, all amort?
HORTENSIO
Mistress, what cheer?
KATHARINA
Faith, as cold as can be.
PETRUCHIO
Pluck up thy spirits; look cheerfully upon me.
Here love; thou see'st how diligent I am
To dress thy meat myself and bring it thee:
I am sure, sweet Kate, this kindness merits thanks.
What, not a word? Nay, then thou lovest it not;
And all my pains is sorted to no proof.
Here, take away this dish.
KATHARINA
I pray you, let it stand.
PETRUCHIO
The poorest service is repaid with thanks;
And so shall mine, before you touch the meat.
KATHARINA
I thank you, sir.
HORTENSIO
Signior Petruchio, fie! you are to blame.
Come, mistress Kate, I'll bear you company.
PETRUCHIO
[Aside] Eat it up all, Hortensio, if thou lovest me.
Much good do it unto thy gentle heart!
Kate, eat apace: and now, my honey love,
Will we return unto thy father's house
And revel it as bravely as the best,
With silken coats and caps and golden rings,
With ruffs and cuffs and fardingales and things;
With scarfs and fans and double change of bravery,
With amber bracelets, beads and all this knavery.
What, hast thou dined? The tailor stays thy leisure,
To deck thy body with his ruffling treasure.
Enter Tailor

Come, tailor, let us see these ornaments;
Lay forth the gown.
Enter Haberdasher

What news with you, sir?
Haberdasher
Here is the cap your worship did bespeak.
PETRUCHIO
Why, this was moulded on a porringer;
A velvet dish: fie, fie! 'tis lewd and filthy:
Why, 'tis a cockle or a walnut-shell,
A knack, a toy, a trick, a baby's cap:
Away with it! come, let me have a bigger.
KATHARINA
I'll have no bigger: this doth fit the time,
And gentlewomen wear such caps as these
PETRUCHIO
When you are gentle, you shall have one too,
And not till then.
HORTENSIO
[Aside] That will not be in haste.
KATHARINA
Why, sir, I trust I may have leave to speak;
And speak I will; I am no child, no babe:
Your betters have endured me say my mind,
And if you cannot, best you stop your ears.
My tongue will tell the anger of my heart,
Or else my heart concealing it will break,
And rather than it shall, I will be free
Even to the uttermost, as I please, in words.
PETRUCHIO
Why, thou say'st true; it is a paltry cap,
A custard-coffin, a bauble, a silken pie:
I love thee well, in that thou likest it not.
KATHARINA
Love me or love me not, I like the cap;
And it I will have, or I will have none.
Exit Haberdasher

PETRUCHIO
Thy gown? why, ay: come, tailor, let us see't.
O mercy, God! what masquing stuff is here?
What's this? a sleeve? 'tis like a demi-cannon:
What, up and down, carved like an apple-tart?
Here's snip and nip and cut and slish and slash,
Like to a censer in a barber's shop:
Why, what, i' devil's name, tailor, call'st thou this?
HORTENSIO
[Aside] I see she's like to have neither cap nor gown.
Tailor
You bid me make it orderly and well,
According to the fashion and the time.
PETRUCHIO
Marry, and did; but if you be remember'd,
I did not bid you mar it to the time.
Go, hop me over every kennel home,
For you shall hop without my custom, sir:
I'll none of it: hence! make your best of it.
KATHARINA
I never saw a better-fashion'd gown,
More quaint, more pleasing, nor more commendable:
Belike you mean to make a puppet of me.
PETRUCHIO
Why, true; he means to make a puppet of thee.
Tailor
She says your worship means to make
a puppet of her.
PETRUCHIO
O monstrous arrogance! Thou liest, thou thread,
thou thimble,
Thou yard, three-quarters, half-yard, quarter, nail!
Thou flea, thou nit, thou winter-cricket thou!
Braved in mine own house with a skein of thread?
Away, thou rag, thou quantity, thou remnant;
Or I shall so be-mete thee with thy yard
As thou shalt think on prating whilst thou livest!
I tell thee, I, that thou hast marr'd her gown.
Tailor
Your worship is deceived; the gown is made
Just as my master had direction:
Grumio gave order how it should be done.
GRUMIO
I gave him no order; I gave him the stuff.
Tailor
But how did you desire it should be made?
GRUMIO
Marry, sir, with needle and thread.
Tailor
But did you not request to have it cut?
GRUMIO
Thou hast faced many things.
Tailor
I have.
GRUMIO
Face not me: thou hast braved many men; brave not
me; I will neither be faced nor braved. I say unto
thee, I bid thy master cut out the gown; but I did
not bid him cut it to pieces: ergo, thou liest.
Tailor
Why, here is the note of the fashion to testify
PETRUCHIO
Read it.
GRUMIO
The note lies in's throat, if he say I said so.
Tailor
[Reads] 'Imprimis, a loose-bodied gown:'
GRUMIO
Master, if ever I said loose-bodied gown, sew me in
the skirts of it, and beat me to death with a bottom
of brown thread: I said a gown.
PETRUCHIO
Proceed.
Tailor
[Reads] 'With a small compassed cape:'
GRUMIO
I confess the cape.
Tailor
[Reads] 'With a trunk sleeve:'
GRUMIO
I confess two sleeves.
Tailor
[Reads] 'The sleeves curiously cut.'
PETRUCHIO
Ay, there's the villany.
GRUMIO
Error i' the bill, sir; error i' the bill.
I commanded the sleeves should be cut out and
sewed up again; and that I'll prove upon thee,
though thy little finger be armed in a thimble.
Tailor
This is true that I say: an I had thee
in place where, thou shouldst know it.
GRUMIO
I am for thee straight: take thou the
bill, give me thy mete-yard, and spare not me.
HORTENSIO
God-a-mercy, Grumio! then he shall have no odds.
PETRUCHIO
Well, sir, in brief, the gown is not for me.
GRUMIO
You are i' the right, sir: 'tis for my mistress.
PETRUCHIO
Go, take it up unto thy master's use.
GRUMIO
Villain, not for thy life: take up my mistress'
gown for thy master's use!
PETRUCHIO
Why, sir, what's your conceit in that?
GRUMIO
O, sir, the conceit is deeper than you think for:
Take up my mistress' gown to his master's use!
O, fie, fie, fie!
PETRUCHIO
[Aside] Hortensio, say thou wilt see the tailor paid.
Go take it hence; be gone, and say no more.
HORTENSIO
Tailor, I'll pay thee for thy gown tomorrow:
Take no unkindness of his hasty words:
Away! I say; commend me to thy master.
Exit Tailor

PETRUCHIO
Well, come, my Kate; we will unto your father's
Even in these honest mean habiliments:
Our purses shall be proud, our garments poor;
For 'tis the mind that makes the body rich;
And as the sun breaks through the darkest clouds,
So honour peereth in the meanest habit.
What is the jay more precious than the lark,
Because his fathers are more beautiful?
Or is the adder better than the eel,
Because his painted skin contents the eye?
O, no, good Kate; neither art thou the worse
For this poor furniture and mean array.
if thou account'st it shame. lay it on me;
And therefore frolic: we will hence forthwith,
To feast and sport us at thy father's house.
Go, call my men, and let us straight to him;
And bring our horses unto Long-lane end;
There will we mount, and thither walk on foot
Let's see; I think 'tis now some seven o'clock,
And well we may come there by dinner-time.
KATHARINA
I dare assure you, sir, 'tis almost two;
And 'twill be supper-time ere you come there.
PETRUCHIO
It shall be seven ere I go to horse:
Look, what I speak, or do, or think to do,
You are still crossing it. Sirs, let't alone:
I will not go to-day; and ere I do,
It shall be what o'clock I say it is.
HORTENSIO
[Aside] Why, so this gallant will command the sun.
Exeunt

SCENE IV. Padua. Before BAPTISTA'S house.
Enter TRANIO, and the Pedant dressed like VINCENTIO
TRANIO
Sir, this is the house: please it you that I call?
Pedant
Ay, what else? and but I be deceived
Signior Baptista may remember me,
Near twenty years ago, in Genoa,
Where we were lodgers at the Pegasus.
TRANIO
'Tis well; and hold your own, in any case,
With such austerity as 'longeth to a father.
Pedant
I warrant you.
Enter BIONDELLO

But, sir, here comes your boy;
'Twere good he were school'd.
TRANIO
Fear you not him. Sirrah Biondello,
Now do your duty throughly, I advise you:
Imagine 'twere the right Vincentio.
BIONDELLO
Tut, fear not me.
TRANIO
But hast thou done thy errand to Baptista?
BIONDELLO
I told him that your father was at Venice,
And that you look'd for him this day in Padua.
TRANIO
Thou'rt a tall fellow: hold thee that to drink.
Here comes Baptista: set your countenance, sir.
Enter BAPTISTA and LUCENTIO

Signior Baptista, you are happily met.
To the Pedant

Sir, this is the gentleman I told you of:
I pray you stand good father to me now,
Give me Bianca for my patrimony.
Pedant
Soft son!
Sir, by your leave: having come to Padua
To gather in some debts, my son Lucentio
Made me acquainted with a weighty cause
Of love between your daughter and himself:
And, for the good report I hear of you
And for the love he beareth to your daughter
And she to him, to stay him not too long,
I am content, in a good father's care,
To have him match'd; and if you please to like
No worse than I, upon some agreement
Me shall you find ready and willing
With one consent to have her so bestow'd;
For curious I cannot be with you,
Signior Baptista, of whom I hear so well.
BAPTISTA
Sir, pardon me in what I have to say:
Your plainness and your shortness please me well.
Right true it is, your son Lucentio here
Doth love my daughter and she loveth him,
Or both dissemble deeply their affections:
And therefore, if you say no more than this,
That like a father you will deal with him
And pass my daughter a sufficient dower,
The match is made, and all is done:
Your son shall have my daughter with consent.
TRANIO
I thank you, sir. Where then do you know best
We be affied and such assurance ta'en
As shall with either part's agreement stand?
BAPTISTA
Not in my house, Lucentio; for, you know,
Pitchers have ears, and I have many servants:
Besides, old Gremio is hearkening still;
And happily we might be interrupted.
TRANIO
Then at my lodging, an it like you:
There doth my father lie; and there, this night,
We'll pass the business privately and well.
Send for your daughter by your servant here:
My boy shall fetch the scrivener presently.
The worst is this, that, at so slender warning,
You are like to have a thin and slender pittance.
BAPTISTA
It likes me well. Biondello, hie you home,
And bid Bianca make her ready straight;
And, if you will, tell what hath happened,
Lucentio's father is arrived in Padua,
And how she's like to be Lucentio's wife.
BIONDELLO
I pray the gods she may with all my heart!
TRANIO
Dally not with the gods, but get thee gone.
Exit BIONDELLO

Signior Baptista, shall I lead the way?
Welcome! one mess is like to be your cheer:
Come, sir; we will better it in Pisa.
BAPTISTA
I follow you.
Exeunt TRANIO, Pedant, and BAPTISTA

Re-enter BIONDELLO

BIONDELLO
Cambio!
LUCENTIO
What sayest thou, Biondello?
BIONDELLO
You saw my master wink and laugh upon you?
LUCENTIO
Biondello, what of that?
BIONDELLO
Faith, nothing; but has left me here behind, to
expound the meaning or moral of his signs and tokens.
LUCENTIO
I pray thee, moralize them.
BIONDELLO
Then thus. Baptista is safe, talking with the
deceiving father of a deceitful son.
LUCENTIO
And what of him?
BIONDELLO
His daughter is to be brought by you to the supper.
LUCENTIO
And then?
BIONDELLO
The old priest of Saint Luke's church is at your
command at all hours.
LUCENTIO
And what of all this?
BIONDELLO
I cannot tell; expect they are busied about a
counterfeit assurance: take you assurance of her,
'cum privilegio ad imprimendum solum:' to the
church; take the priest, clerk, and some sufficient
honest witnesses: If this be not that you look for,
I have no more to say, But bid Bianca farewell for
ever and a day.
LUCENTIO
Hearest thou, Biondello?
BIONDELLO
I cannot tarry: I knew a wench married in an
afternoon as she went to the garden for parsley to
stuff a rabbit; and so may you, sir: and so, adieu,
sir. My master hath appointed me to go to Saint
Luke's, to bid the priest be ready to come against
you come with your appendix.
Exit

LUCENTIO
I may, and will, if she be so contented:
She will be pleased; then wherefore should I doubt?
Hap what hap may, I'll roundly go about her:
It shall go hard if Cambio go without her.
Exit

SCENE V. A public road.
Enter PETRUCHIO, KATHARINA, HORTENSIO, and Servants
PETRUCHIO
Come on, i' God's name; once more toward our father's.
Good Lord, how bright and goodly shines the moon!
KATHARINA
The moon! the sun: it is not moonlight now.
PETRUCHIO
I say it is the moon that shines so bright.
KATHARINA
I know it is the sun that shines so bright.
PETRUCHIO
Now, by my mother's son, and that's myself,
It shall be moon, or star, or what I list,
Or ere I journey to your father's house.
Go on, and fetch our horses back again.
Evermore cross'd and cross'd; nothing but cross'd!
HORTENSIO
Say as he says, or we shall never go.
KATHARINA
Forward, I pray, since we have come so far,
And be it moon, or sun, or what you please:
An if you please to call it a rush-candle,
Henceforth I vow it shall be so for me.
PETRUCHIO
I say it is the moon.
KATHARINA
I know it is the moon.
PETRUCHIO
Nay, then you lie: it is the blessed sun.
KATHARINA
Then, God be bless'd, it is the blessed sun:
But sun it is not, when you say it is not;
And the moon changes even as your mind.
What you will have it named, even that it is;
And so it shall be so for Katharina.
HORTENSIO
Petruchio, go thy ways; the field is won.
PETRUCHIO
Well, forward, forward! thus the bowl should run,
And not unluckily against the bias.
But, soft! company is coming here.
Enter VINCENTIO

To VINCENTIO

Good morrow, gentle mistress: where away?
Tell me, sweet Kate, and tell me truly too,
Hast thou beheld a fresher gentlewoman?
Such war of white and red within her cheeks!
What stars do spangle heaven with such beauty,
As those two eyes become that heavenly face?
Fair lovely maid, once more good day to thee.
Sweet Kate, embrace her for her beauty's sake.
HORTENSIO
A' will make the man mad, to make a woman of him.
KATHARINA
Young budding virgin, fair and fresh and sweet,
Whither away, or where is thy abode?
Happy the parents of so fair a child;
Happier the man, whom favourable stars
Allot thee for his lovely bed-fellow!
PETRUCHIO
Why, how now, Kate! I hope thou art not mad:
This is a man, old, wrinkled, faded, wither'd,
And not a maiden, as thou say'st he is.
KATHARINA
Pardon, old father, my mistaking eyes,
That have been so bedazzled with the sun
That everything I look on seemeth green:
Now I perceive thou art a reverend father;
Pardon, I pray thee, for my mad mistaking.
PETRUCHIO
Do, good old grandsire; and withal make known
Which way thou travellest: if along with us,
We shall be joyful of thy company.
VINCENTIO
Fair sir, and you my merry mistress,
That with your strange encounter much amazed me,
My name is call'd Vincentio; my dwelling Pisa;
And bound I am to Padua; there to visit
A son of mine, which long I have not seen.
PETRUCHIO
What is his name?
VINCENTIO
Lucentio, gentle sir.
PETRUCHIO
Happily we met; the happier for thy son.
And now by law, as well as reverend age,
I may entitle thee my loving father:
The sister to my wife, this gentlewoman,
Thy son by this hath married. Wonder not,
Nor be grieved: she is of good esteem,
Her dowery wealthy, and of worthy birth;
Beside, so qualified as may beseem
The spouse of any noble gentleman.
Let me embrace with old Vincentio,
And wander we to see thy honest son,
Who will of thy arrival be full joyous.
VINCENTIO
But is it true? or else is it your pleasure,
Like pleasant travellers, to break a jest
Upon the company you overtake?
HORTENSIO
I do assure thee, father, so it is.
PETRUCHIO
Come, go along, and see the truth hereof;
For our first merriment hath made thee jealous.
Exeunt all but HORTENSIO

HORTENSIO
Well, Petruchio, this has put me in heart.
Have to my widow! and if she be froward,
Then hast thou taught Hortensio to be untoward.
Exit

ACT V
SCENE I. Padua. Before LUCENTIO'S house.
GREMIO discovered. Enter behind BIONDELLO, LUCENTIO, and BIANCA
BIONDELLO
Softly and swiftly, sir; for the priest is ready.
LUCENTIO
I fly, Biondello: but they may chance to need thee
at home; therefore leave us.
BIONDELLO
Nay, faith, I'll see the church o' your back; and
then come back to my master's as soon as I can.
Exeunt LUCENTIO, BIANCA, and BIONDELLO

GREMIO
I marvel Cambio comes not all this while.
Enter PETRUCHIO, KATHARINA, VINCENTIO, GRUMIO, with Attendants

PETRUCHIO
Sir, here's the door, this is Lucentio's house:
My father's bears more toward the market-place;
Thither must I, and here I leave you, sir.
VINCENTIO
You shall not choose but drink before you go:
I think I shall command your welcome here,
And, by all likelihood, some cheer is toward.
Knocks

GREMIO
They're busy within; you were best knock louder.
Pedant looks out of the window

Pedant
What's he that knocks as he would beat down the gate?
VINCENTIO
Is Signior Lucentio within, sir?
Pedant
He's within, sir, but not to be spoken withal.
VINCENTIO
What if a man bring him a hundred pound or two, to
make merry withal?
Pedant
Keep your hundred pounds to yourself: he shall
need none, so long as I live.
PETRUCHIO
Nay, I told you your son was well beloved in Padua.
Do you hear, sir? To leave frivolous circumstances,
I pray you, tell Signior Lucentio that his father is
come from Pisa, and is here at the door to speak with him.
Pedant
Thou liest: his father is come from Padua and here
looking out at the window.
VINCENTIO
Art thou his father?
Pedant
Ay, sir; so his mother says, if I may believe her.
PETRUCHIO
[To VINCENTIO] Why, how now, gentleman! why, this
is flat knavery, to take upon you another man's name.
Pedant
Lay hands on the villain: I believe a' means to
cozen somebody in this city under my countenance.
Re-enter BIONDELLO

BIONDELLO
I have seen them in the church together: God send
'em good shipping! But who is here? mine old
master Vincentio! now we are undone and brought to nothing.
VINCENTIO
[Seeing BIONDELLO]
Come hither, crack-hemp.
BIONDELLO
Hope I may choose, sir.
VINCENTIO
Come hither, you rogue. What, have you forgot me?
BIONDELLO
Forgot you! no, sir: I could not forget you, for I
never saw you before in all my life.
VINCENTIO
What, you notorious villain, didst thou never see
thy master's father, Vincentio?
BIONDELLO
What, my old worshipful old master? yes, marry, sir:
see where he looks out of the window.
VINCENTIO
Is't so, indeed.
Beats BIONDELLO

BIONDELLO
Help, help, help! here's a madman will murder me.
Exit

Pedant
Help, son! help, Signior Baptista!
Exit from above

PETRUCHIO
Prithee, Kate, let's stand aside and see the end of
this controversy.
They retire

Re-enter Pedant below; TRANIO, BAPTISTA, and Servants

TRANIO
Sir, what are you that offer to beat my servant?
VINCENTIO
What am I, sir! nay, what are you, sir? O immortal
gods! O fine villain! A silken doublet! a velvet
hose! a scarlet cloak! and a copatain hat! O, I
am undone! I am undone! while I play the good
husband at home, my son and my servant spend all at
the university.
TRANIO
How now! what's the matter?
BAPTISTA
What, is the man lunatic?
TRANIO
Sir, you seem a sober ancient gentleman by your
habit, but your words show you a madman. Why, sir,
what 'cerns it you if I wear pearl and gold? I
thank my good father, I am able to maintain it.
VINCENTIO
Thy father! O villain! he is a sailmaker in Bergamo.
BAPTISTA
You mistake, sir, you mistake, sir. Pray, what do
you think is his name?
VINCENTIO
His name! as if I knew not his name: I have brought
him up ever since he was three years old, and his
name is Tranio.
Pedant
Away, away, mad ass! his name is Lucentio and he is
mine only son, and heir to the lands of me, Signior Vincentio.
VINCENTIO
Lucentio! O, he hath murdered his master! Lay hold
on him, I charge you, in the duke's name. O, my
son, my son! Tell me, thou villain, where is my son Lucentio?
TRANIO
Call forth an officer.
Enter one with an Officer

Carry this mad knave to the gaol. Father Baptista,
I charge you see that he be forthcoming.
VINCENTIO
Carry me to the gaol!
GREMIO
Stay, officer: he shall not go to prison.
BAPTISTA
Talk not, Signior Gremio: I say he shall go to prison.
GREMIO
Take heed, Signior Baptista, lest you be
cony-catched in this business: I dare swear this
is the right Vincentio.
Pedant
Swear, if thou darest.
GREMIO
Nay, I dare not swear it.
TRANIO
Then thou wert best say that I am not Lucentio.
GREMIO
Yes, I know thee to be Signior Lucentio.
BAPTISTA
Away with the dotard! to the gaol with him!
VINCENTIO
Thus strangers may be hailed and abused: O
monstrous villain!
Re-enter BIONDELLO, with LUCENTIO and BIANCA

BIONDELLO
O! we are spoiled and--yonder he is: deny him,
forswear him, or else we are all undone.
LUCENTIO
[Kneeling] Pardon, sweet father.
VINCENTIO
Lives my sweet son?
Exeunt BIONDELLO, TRANIO, and Pedant, as fast as may be

BIANCA
Pardon, dear father.
BAPTISTA
How hast thou offended?
Where is Lucentio?
LUCENTIO
Here's Lucentio,
Right son to the right Vincentio;
That have by marriage made thy daughter mine,
While counterfeit supposes bleared thine eyne.
GREMIO
Here's packing, with a witness to deceive us all!
VINCENTIO
Where is that damned villain Tranio,
That faced and braved me in this matter so?
BAPTISTA
Why, tell me, is not this my Cambio?
BIANCA
Cambio is changed into Lucentio.
LUCENTIO
Love wrought these miracles. Bianca's love
Made me exchange my state with Tranio,
While he did bear my countenance in the town;
And happily I have arrived at the last
Unto the wished haven of my bliss.
What Tranio did, myself enforced him to;
Then pardon him, sweet father, for my sake.
VINCENTIO
I'll slit the villain's nose, that would have sent
me to the gaol.
BAPTISTA
But do you hear, sir? have you married my daughter
without asking my good will?
VINCENTIO
Fear not, Baptista; we will content you, go to: but
I will in, to be revenged for this villany.
Exit

BAPTISTA
And I, to sound the depth of this knavery.
Exit

LUCENTIO
Look not pale, Bianca; thy father will not frown.
Exeunt LUCENTIO and BIANCA

GREMIO
My cake is dough; but I'll in among the rest,
Out of hope of all, but my share of the feast.
Exit

KATHARINA
Husband, let's follow, to see the end of this ado.
PETRUCHIO
First kiss me, Kate, and we will.
KATHARINA
What, in the midst of the street?
PETRUCHIO
What, art thou ashamed of me?
KATHARINA
No, sir, God forbid; but ashamed to kiss.
PETRUCHIO
Why, then let's home again. Come, sirrah, let's away.
KATHARINA
Nay, I will give thee a kiss: now pray thee, love, stay.
PETRUCHIO
Is not this well? Come, my sweet Kate:
Better once than never, for never too late.
Exeunt

SCENE II. Padua. LUCENTIO'S house.
Enter BAPTISTA, VINCENTIO, GREMIO, the Pedant, LUCENTIO, BIANCA, PETRUCHIO, KATHARINA, HORTENSIO, and Widow, TRANIO, BIONDELLO, and GRUMIO the Serving-men with Tranio bringing in a banquet
LUCENTIO
At last, though long, our jarring notes agree:
And time it is, when raging war is done,
To smile at scapes and perils overblown.
My fair Bianca, bid my father welcome,
While I with self-same kindness welcome thine.
Brother Petruchio, sister Katharina,
And thou, Hortensio, with thy loving widow,
Feast with the best, and welcome to my house:
My banquet is to close our stomachs up,
After our great good cheer. Pray you, sit down;
For now we sit to chat as well as eat.
PETRUCHIO
Nothing but sit and sit, and eat and eat!
BAPTISTA
Padua affords this kindness, son Petruchio.
PETRUCHIO
Padua affords nothing but what is kind.
HORTENSIO
For both our sakes, I would that word were true.
PETRUCHIO
Now, for my life, Hortensio fears his widow.
Widow
Then never trust me, if I be afeard.
PETRUCHIO
You are very sensible, and yet you miss my sense:
I mean, Hortensio is afeard of you.
Widow
He that is giddy thinks the world turns round.
PETRUCHIO
Roundly replied.
KATHARINA
Mistress, how mean you that?
Widow
Thus I conceive by him.
PETRUCHIO
Conceives by me! How likes Hortensio that?
HORTENSIO
My widow says, thus she conceives her tale.
PETRUCHIO
Very well mended. Kiss him for that, good widow.
KATHARINA
'He that is giddy thinks the world turns round:'
I pray you, tell me what you meant by that.
Widow
Your husband, being troubled with a shrew,
Measures my husband's sorrow by his woe:
And now you know my meaning,
KATHARINA
A very mean meaning.
Widow
Right, I mean you.
KATHARINA
And I am mean indeed, respecting you.
PETRUCHIO
To her, Kate!
HORTENSIO
To her, widow!
PETRUCHIO
A hundred marks, my Kate does put her down.
HORTENSIO
That's my office.
PETRUCHIO
Spoke like an officer; ha' to thee, lad!
Drinks to HORTENSIO

BAPTISTA
How likes Gremio these quick-witted folks?
GREMIO
Believe me, sir, they butt together well.
BIANCA
Head, and butt! an hasty-witted body
Would say your head and butt were head and horn.
VINCENTIO
Ay, mistress bride, hath that awaken'd you?
BIANCA
Ay, but not frighted me; therefore I'll sleep again.
PETRUCHIO
Nay, that you shall not: since you have begun,
Have at you for a bitter jest or two!
BIANCA
Am I your bird? I mean to shift my bush;
And then pursue me as you draw your bow.
You are welcome all.
Exeunt BIANCA, KATHARINA, and Widow

PETRUCHIO
She hath prevented me. Here, Signior Tranio.
This bird you aim'd at, though you hit her not;
Therefore a health to all that shot and miss'd.
TRANIO
O, sir, Lucentio slipp'd me like his greyhound,
Which runs himself and catches for his master.
PETRUCHIO
A good swift simile, but something currish.
TRANIO
'Tis well, sir, that you hunted for yourself:
'Tis thought your deer does hold you at a bay.
BAPTISTA
O ho, Petruchio! Tranio hits you now.
LUCENTIO
I thank thee for that gird, good Tranio.
HORTENSIO
Confess, confess, hath he not hit you here?
PETRUCHIO
A' has a little gall'd me, I confess;
And, as the jest did glance away from me,
'Tis ten to one it maim'd you two outright.
BAPTISTA
Now, in good sadness, son Petruchio,
I think thou hast the veriest shrew of all.
PETRUCHIO
Well, I say no: and therefore for assurance
Let's each one send unto his wife;
And he whose wife is most obedient
To come at first when he doth send for her,
Shall win the wager which we will propose.
HORTENSIO
Content. What is the wager?
LUCENTIO
Twenty crowns.
PETRUCHIO
Twenty crowns!
I'll venture so much of my hawk or hound,
But twenty times so much upon my wife.
LUCENTIO
A hundred then.
HORTENSIO
Content.
PETRUCHIO
A match! 'tis done.
HORTENSIO
Who shall begin?
LUCENTIO
That will I.
Go, Biondello, bid your mistress come to me.
BIONDELLO
I go.
Exit

BAPTISTA
Son, I'll be your half, Bianca comes.
LUCENTIO
I'll have no halves; I'll bear it all myself.
Re-enter BIONDELLO

How now! what news?
BIONDELLO
Sir, my mistress sends you word
That she is busy and she cannot come.
PETRUCHIO
How! she is busy and she cannot come!
Is that an answer?
GREMIO
Ay, and a kind one too:
Pray God, sir, your wife send you not a worse.
PETRUCHIO
I hope better.
HORTENSIO
Sirrah Biondello, go and entreat my wife
To come to me forthwith.
Exit BIONDELLO

PETRUCHIO
O, ho! entreat her!
Nay, then she must needs come.
HORTENSIO
I am afraid, sir,
Do what you can, yours will not be entreated.
Re-enter BIONDELLO

Now, where's my wife?
BIONDELLO
She says you have some goodly jest in hand:
She will not come: she bids you come to her.
PETRUCHIO
Worse and worse; she will not come! O vile,
Intolerable, not to be endured!
Sirrah Grumio, go to your mistress;
Say, I command her to come to me.
Exit GRUMIO

HORTENSIO
I know her answer.
PETRUCHIO
What?
HORTENSIO
She will not.
PETRUCHIO
The fouler fortune mine, and there an end.
BAPTISTA
Now, by my holidame, here comes Katharina!
Re-enter KATARINA

KATHARINA
What is your will, sir, that you send for me?
PETRUCHIO
Where is your sister, and Hortensio's wife?
KATHARINA
They sit conferring by the parlor fire.
PETRUCHIO
Go fetch them hither: if they deny to come.
Swinge me them soundly forth unto their husbands:
Away, I say, and bring them hither straight.
Exit KATHARINA

LUCENTIO
Here is a wonder, if you talk of a wonder.
HORTENSIO
And so it is: I wonder what it bodes.
PETRUCHIO
Marry, peace it bodes, and love and quiet life,
And awful rule and right supremacy;
And, to be short, what not, that's sweet and happy?
BAPTISTA
Now, fair befal thee, good Petruchio!
The wager thou hast won; and I will add
Unto their losses twenty thousand crowns;
Another dowry to another daughter,
For she is changed, as she had never been.
PETRUCHIO
Nay, I will win my wager better yet
And show more sign of her obedience,
Her new-built virtue and obedience.
See where she comes and brings your froward wives
As prisoners to her womanly persuasion.
Re-enter KATHARINA, with BIANCA and Widow

Katharina, that cap of yours becomes you not:
Off with that bauble, throw it under-foot.
Widow
Lord, let me never have a cause to sigh,
Till I be brought to such a silly pass!
BIANCA
Fie! what a foolish duty call you this?
LUCENTIO
I would your duty were as foolish too:
The wisdom of your duty, fair Bianca,
Hath cost me an hundred crowns since supper-time.
BIANCA
The more fool you, for laying on my duty.
PETRUCHIO
Katharina, I charge thee, tell these headstrong women
What duty they do owe their lords and husbands.
Widow
Come, come, you're mocking: we will have no telling.
PETRUCHIO
Come on, I say; and first begin with her.
Widow
She shall not.
PETRUCHIO
I say she shall: and first begin with her.
KATHARINA
Fie, fie! unknit that threatening unkind brow,
And dart not scornful glances from those eyes,
To wound thy lord, thy king, thy governor:
It blots thy beauty as frosts do bite the meads,
Confounds thy fame as whirlwinds shake fair buds,
And in no sense is meet or amiable.
A woman moved is like a fountain troubled,
Muddy, ill-seeming, thick, bereft of beauty;
And while it is so, none so dry or thirsty
Will deign to sip or touch one drop of it.
Thy husband is thy lord, thy life, thy keeper,
Thy head, thy sovereign; one that cares for thee,
And for thy maintenance commits his body
To painful labour both by sea and land,
To watch the night in storms, the day in cold,
Whilst thou liest warm at home, secure and safe;
And craves no other tribute at thy hands
But love, fair looks and true obedience;
Too little payment for so great a debt.
Such duty as the subject owes the prince
Even such a woman oweth to her husband;
And when she is froward, peevish, sullen, sour,
And not obedient to his honest will,
What is she but a foul contending rebel
And graceless traitor to her loving lord?
I am ashamed that women are so simple
To offer war where they should kneel for peace;
Or seek for rule, supremacy and sway,
When they are bound to serve, love and obey.
Why are our bodies soft and weak and smooth,
Unapt to toil and trouble in the world,
But that our soft conditions and our hearts
Should well agree with our external parts?
Come, come, you froward and unable worms!
My mind hath been as big as one of yours,
My heart as great, my reason haply more,
To bandy word for word and frown for frown;
But now I see our lances are but straws,
Our strength as weak, our weakness past compare,
That seeming to be most which we indeed least are.
Then vail your stomachs, for it is no boot,
And place your hands below your husband's foot:
In token of which duty, if he please,
My hand is ready; may it do him ease.
PETRUCHIO
Why, there's a wench! Come on, and kiss me, Kate.
LUCENTIO
Well, go thy ways, old lad; for thou shalt ha't.
VINCENTIO
'Tis a good hearing when children are toward.
LUCENTIO
But a harsh hearing when women are froward.
PETRUCHIO
Come, Kate, we'll to bed.
We three are married, but you two are sped.
To LUCENTIO

'Twas I won the wager, though you hit the white;
And, being a winner, God give you good night!
Exeunt PETRUCHIO and KATHARINA

HORTENSIO
Now, go thy ways; thou hast tamed a curst shrew.
LUCENTIO
'Tis a wonder, by your leave, she will be tamed so.
Exeunt